This is Jockel Podcast number 312.
With echo Charles and me, Jockel Willink.
Good evening, echo.
Good evening.
Something slammed into my helicopter.
We didn't know what it was or where it had impacted,
but the heelow bucked hard, like a small sports car
going over a large speed bump.
We'd been passing by the Olympic hotel for the third time
doing 50 knots at about 75 feet
when an RPG round rocketed into the tail section.
But that was 35 feet behind me.
The aircraft was 18,000 pounds of metal muscle
then it certainly wasn't coming apart.
At least not yet.
I looked quietly.
I looked quickly around the cockpit
while Ray did the same.
Both of us testing the controls and checking the gauges.
Everything was in the green.
No flight control problems, engine malfunctions
or weird noises.
No one in my bird said a word.
And then super six four year hit bad.
It was Matthews up in the C2 bird.
You better put it on the ground.
From his position high over the battle,
he had seen the rocket impact just below my tail
raking pieces away and pin wheels as it detonated.
No shit, I thought as I rolled out of the turn.
Just ahead, maybe a mile off was what appeared to be
a clear area, certainly large enough to land a black hawk.
But the aircraft seemed to be flying normally
and I was facing the decision to crash in the middle
of a firefight or fly just two more miles
to the safety of the airfield.
I didn't hesitate or discuss it with anyone.
It was my decision to make.
We'd go for the field.
Still, I kept my eye on that midway point.
It sort of looked like a city park
which was what it had been long ago
when the place was prosperous.
Now as we closed on it,
I could see that it was covered with tin shacks and huts.
But none of that mattered
because within a few seconds,
the world went completely to hell.
The RPG had smashed into the rear gear box
a fixture the size of a big watermelon
and full of oil and gears
where the drive shaft came in to have its speed
and direction ratios altered for the tail rotor.
The bottom of that box had been blown off
the drive shaft bent and twisted.
I heard a rapidly accelerating wine
and unearthly building scream
and then the tail rotor assembly
completely disintegrated into vapor
with an ear splitting bang.
The nose of the helicopter immediately started to spin
to the right, the tail rotor on a blackhawk
counters the torque created by the main rotor system
and the pedal pedals control the pitch of the tail rotor.
As we passed through the first 90 degrees of rotation,
I instinctively countered with the left pedal
and I knew we'd lost it.
I'll never forget looking down to make sure
I was pushing the pedal
and seeing my boot jammed all the way to the floor.
My body was reacting properly
but my yellow was not.
I keyed the mic.
Six fours lost the tail rotor,
we're going in hard.
I looked over it, ray and said,
I guess we better pull them off.
I was referring to the engines
because the only way to counter that spin
was to shut them down and eliminate the torque.
But just as the blackhawk manual describes such an emergency
if you don't kill the engines right away,
the force will make it physically impossible
to reach up for the power control levers.
I'd always thought that sounded a little extreme.
It wasn't super six fours started to spin so fast
that the sky and ground became nothing
but two blurred stripes of blue and brown
in front of my eyes.
It was like riding a merry-go-round
looking straight out from the side of your horse
while the teenage operator goes nuts
and halls it up to 50 revs per minute.
I was hurled against my harness,
my hands desperately yanking and twisting the controls
and I looked over it,
ray, to see him fighting the force with every muscle,
his glove hands quaking
as he tried to reach up for the power levels.
I knew I was going to die.
And that right there is an excerpt from the book
called in the company of Heroes,
which was written by retired chief
worn officer Michael J. Durant,
who was a member of the legendary Knight Stockers
and who was shot down during Operation Gothic Serpent
and was held captive during the battle of Mogadishu.
That operation was documented in the book Black Hawk Down
by author Mark Bowden
and the book was eventually adapted into the movie Black Hawk Down.
But it is an honor tonight to have Mike Durant
with us to discuss his lessons learned,
his experiences from the army,
from the Knight Stockers, from Somalia and beyond.
Mike, thank you for joining us.
My pleasure, Jaco. Good to be here.
It's a rough way to start off this podcast,
I guess, putting you through those moments.
Yeah, you know, it's interesting
that I wrote the book over 10 years ago
and I tried to go back and read it again a couple years back
and honestly, I just don't want to relive it.
So it is kind of hard sometimes
because those were pretty rough times,
but I'm glad we got it all down on paper
and you know, it's certainly a story worth telling.
All right, so I like to start at the beginning.
So we're going to jump into a little bit of the childhood
where you came from, how you ended up being you.
You're saying the book as far back as I can remember,
I always wanted to be a helicopter pilot.
Sure, other James Flash by when you're a kid
in a small New England town, fire fighter, police men,
sports hero, brain surgeon.
I never had the brain surgeon one.
Yeah, I think we made that up.
I don't think I ever thought that.
But the idea of flying for a living
had always enthralled me the most.
My father was a full-time first surgeon
in the Army National Guard and many of my uncles
and cousin served there as well, but I didn't have
fancies about flying off into battle
and coming home here with a chest full of metals.
I grew up during the Vietnam era when none of the kids
around me wanted anything to do with wearing a uniform.
So it wasn't about patriotism or flag waving
or anything like that.
My feelings about duty, honor and country
would evolve over time.
But back then, the Army was just a way for me
to get the best flight training without having to pay for it.
I got to ask this question the other day.
I was on the special operations now,
has their own podcast.
And they asked me, they set me up with this really nice question.
You know, can you tell us about when you realized
that service was going to be a part of your life
and you wanting to be recognized that you want to be something bigger
than yourself.
I was like, hey, I appreciate you thinking I was like that
when I was 17 years old, but I just wanted a machine gun.
Right.
It's the same thing.
You know, I just, I just tell like it is.
That's just that's the reality.
It was, you know, we're in a paper mill town
and nothing is folks who work in the mill,
but that's it.
I mean, you either, you're going to go have a career
working in the mill or you got to go find something somewhere else.
And when I found out the Army had a helicopter program
and I could sign up and get trained to do it,
I'm like, that's me.
And fortune of one that, you know, one of the guys
that it worked out for.
Yeah.
You say I was barely 17 when I sneaked off to a briefing
at the local recruiting office.
The Army sales pitch was slick.
I'd be attending all of these advanced and top secret
training schools and have all sorts of incredible adventures.
And I swallowed it, hook, line, and sinker.
I wanted to get into flight school right away,
but the recruiter told me that was not possible.
I would have to join up and then apply for flight school
while in service.
Still my test scores were pretty high.
And I was confident that I eventually would make it.
College is not an option for me.
I only wanted to fly.
And I signed that commitment paper on October 25th, 1978.
So you did that your junior year?
Let's see.
So that would have been the fall of my senior year.
OK.
Yeah.
A year later, shortly after my graduation
in high school, I found myself in basic training.
So you go to basic training.
How's that?
Yeah.
All those wonderful adventures.
So I'll quickly become reality.
Now I think it, for me, having grown up the way I did,
it was a shock.
I mean, it really was.
Now basic training, looking back now,
compared to a lot of the other stuff that went on through my career,
was probably nothing.
But for a kid who didn't do a whole lot,
had a couple of fairly easy jobs.
And it was a dramatic change of lifestyle.
What sports did you play growing up in New Hampshire?
Actually, mostly hockey.
I played a little football.
I was horrible at baseball.
I still can't throw baseball out of no what the problem is.
And then a lot of outdoor activity skiing,
a lot of snow skiing actually.
My dad was a big hunter in Fisherman.
So we did a lot of that.
His job other than being a national guard,
he actually was a surveyor for a forestry company.
So he got out in the woods all the time.
And for him, that was his dream job.
Because he's a hunter.
So now he can go recall where he's going to go hunting,
while he's getting paid to work for the paper company.
So it was a win-win for him.
But the end result was a lot of time outdoors
and awesome place to grow up.
But northern New England is just a fantastic place.
And every member I have of it is a good one.
I grew up in Connecticut and Maine.
So New England has definitely has a lot of nice things
about that's for sure.
So he's going away from the city.
That is also for sure.
So you end up going to DLI, Defence Language Institute.
How, what did you just get a good score on the D-Lab or something?
So the recruiter, you just said,
told me I couldn't go straight to flight school.
Is that true or not?
It's not.
So you've heard the lot.
You know when the recruiter's lying, because the lips are moving.
I mean, that's pretty much, they have a quota.
They're trying to fill slots.
They're going to push you in that direction.
I guess they were just short Spanish voice intercepted operators
at particular day.
So he convinced me.
And I talked to a couple of folks and they said,
they're going to send you to school for a year to learn a language.
That's a great deal.
You should take it.
So I agreed and I did it.
So you went to Spanish school.
And we dealt with things just behind music.
We dealt with things just behind music.
There were some things.
Good work.
Did you get sent you down in Panama?
I did.
Yeah.
What were you doing flying up and listening listening in on the comms?
No, we actually had a station there.
Actually there were two.
There were one on the E.S.
One on the west side.
And we were listening to cums throughout Central America.
There's a gigantic antenna array and we sat right in the middle of it.
My job was to find it and then like write a summary of what they were talking about and then it would go to the analyst and they would decide whether or not
It was you know worth really documenting
So I'm I'm recording it and I'm making notes just basically so it wasn't exactly the glamorous
You know James Bond career that I thought it might be as described yeah, and you start putting in for flight school
As soon as you get there very soon afterward
I still remember you know I already wanted to fly and I was on the beach one day
I mean Panama's pretty nice place to be don't get me wrong. It was a good assignment
And these two Huey's came low level right over the beach and I'm like oh, yeah
Yeah, I forgot about that I need to go pursue that because it you know
It's just there's something about I don't know it helicopters if you get involved in them
They get in your blood. You know there's there's nothing better and
When I when I had that moment on the beach I said I'm getting this going again
People don't realize now, you know everything we do is on our phone on you know
Go log in the internet back then and you're filling out forms and you know making copies and and
Putting it in an envelope so it was a it was a little bit of an adventure applying for flight school from overseas
But I made it happen. I got accept how how was like the acceptance rate was it hard to get accepted?
I don't know if it was super hard that the
The hard part actually came in flight school a lot of people washed out or or
You know again, they're trying to get certain numbers through so like our class started with 80 and we ended up graduating 40 now
They didn't all get washed out, but they got pushed back to other classes. Yeah, so
And that's what going right back in a boot camp when you when you go to for rocker Alabama as far as they're gonna
Tighten you up and yeah, they can they shave your head again and you know
You're doing square meals and you got five minutes to eat and you know
They're yelling at you from the moment you wake up they're inspecting your bed, but it's all there's a purpose and I'm sure some of it
Doesn't accomplish much but a lot of the stuff when you look back at it
It's about attention to detail right? I mean if you're a pre-flight and aircraft or you're flying a mission
You gotta be focused on what you're doing. I mean you know you can't be you know often lolol
And you got it you gotta be you know that that's exactly two inches it's supposed to be two inches
Okay, it's good move on to the next thing right, but
You know at the time you're like why are they inspecting my bed? You know it doesn't seem to make sense
But it weeds out the people that that can't do that sort of thing
They don't have that discipline so you start off in a
T-h 55 which I thought was funny you saying the book it they had those things painted bright orange
Hey
Student yes, yes, like student driver side
Absolutely because they were dating my roommate had a mid air just a put in real active. Yeah, I mean we had see you solo with less than 10 hours in the aircraft
So can you imagine
10 hours of flight time and you're given a helicopter go take it around the pattern and
He and another classmate crashed into each other because you're you're flying multiple runways
That are parallel to each other so they're like opposite direction in the pattern and they both overshot
And they ran into each other now fortunately
It was minor damage, but again you got seven eight hours in a helicopter and you suddenly had a mid air
What do I do? One of them thought yet an engine failure, which is not even close to what the problem was
So he did what's called an auto rotation thing
You know, but his engine's working fine. He just but he got it on the ground somehow. How do you how do you collide helicopters and not have a catastrophic event?
It's your lucky day. I mean go straight to Vegas because I mean they should have opened dead and neither one of them
Actually even washed out they kept they stayed with the class. That was amazing. Yeah, what part made contact so the rotor blades of one
Impacted the landing gear and underneath of the other so it like chop part of the landing gear off and chop some antennas off
And it makes it makes it yeah exciting times right out of the gate and then you go from that bird to a Huey
Right, did you think you were in nom when you're flying the Huey actually it feels like you get in the space shuttle
I mean because you know
It's like a maybe you get into a Ferrari if you drive a Toyota every day
You know, I mean just seems very advanced. There's just a lot of stuff in there and
And then of course that happens again when I ultimately end up in the blackhawk, but you know each each leap forward is
You know there's a lot more systems to know and a lot more gauges and
It's just incredible you know the first time you fly this like wow, okay
I'm really here. This is this is where I wanted to go
You know and then you keep going beyond that it seems like again from my rudimentary knowledge and from being in you know
Be it fine around in a Huey it seems like where you're in a Huey
You're in a like a 19 65 muscle car and then when you go into a blackhawk
You feel like you're in a in a brand new you know Tesla
Like electronic everything is that accurate or am I just dumb?
No, you're absolutely right now. It's be careful here because my wife is actually a Huey
So I can't say any disparaging things about a Huey
It's a great Eric she always jokes around and says you know the last
When they fly the last blackhawk to a museum and they fly the crew out they'll fly that crew out with a Huey
Because it'll be around long in the blackhawk ever well, but no you're right it just it seems
I have a picture of the first flight I took in a blackhawk from
Behind you know it has digital gauges and things like that did you just you know
Don't have in those legacy aircraft they're all steam gauges or needles
So you know again, it's it's like flying a spaceship
I mean it really it's intimidating at first but after a while
It's just an extension of yourself and then what was your so you get qualified in the blackhawk and then you go
You end up getting stationed over in Korea
To be to be a MetaVac pilot right and when I first got that assignment I'm like MetaVac
You know, I don't want to go fly MetaVac
I want to be you know in the 101st or
You know one of the real you know go to war kind of units, but in the end
Being in MetaVac was the best of time when I could get because you're by yourself
You're you're constantly flying single ship missions
You you graduate to pilot commands that it's very quickly so you start being forced into that decision making process and
You know owning it and the responsibility and all those things that go along with being in charge of something
Whereas if you if you go to a more traditional unit
You're you're just kind of a duck in a row. You're not doing a lot of things on your own
You don't have a lot of decision making put on you and I flew a lot
We we flew a ton in that unit and as a brand new pilot
You need those two things you need experience, you know moving the sticks around and you need to be put in situations where you have to make decisions
That really helps you grow and you've got life and death situations happening because you're going to pick up guys that are in
Your in training operations and one have you see you and I haven't said this yet
But obviously I'm not reading this whole book right now
You know you there's so much detail and you talk about the lessons you learned there
That's some of the stuff that's in the book the books incredible for all kinds of lessons incredible storytelling
And that's what you talk about some of those some of those situations that you were in where you had people's lives on the line and you're making decisions as a as a young
Or an officer flying those birds definitely a lot of lessons learned there. Absolutely. I look back. I mean, I was 22
And I look at you know I've got kids that are much older than that
And I I'm like I'm not sure that I would put them in that responsibility nothing against them
It's just you know you you think about how green you are you know
I mean that's that's fairly young to be taking on that kind of responsibility
But that's that's how you evolve and become once you you really can be if you don't even push the limit
You're not ever going to get where you might go so you do that opt you do the
MetaVac for two years in Korea. Yeah, it's a one year tour
But I was getting so much flight time and I liked it there so much. I said hey, I'll stay longer
So I extended my tour not quite two years, but almost and from there you had back to a
Fort Campbell
When you're there I'm gonna go to the book here in January 1986
I reported back to Fort Campbell and with another pilot from my MetaVac unit in Korea bought a house off base
I remember it well because I was as I was unpacking
Gear the television was on and I stood there open mouth watching the explosion the space shutter shuttle
Challenger
There was a national tragedy
But considering how long the space program had gone without a fatal miss app I wasn't at all surprised
It's a reminder that if you spend your career in the air you can't get complacent
The next day I was ready and raring to audition
for the 160 of special operations aviation regiment
How would you heard about the night stalkers prior to this so they were still kind of under cover at that under cover's not really right
Word but not not really spoken about publicly certainly not by the military
I actually heard about him in a bar in Korea
Some guy talking about hey they get this unit, you know, and I read Tom Clancy books. I mean I was I was you know
Very intrigued by that sort of thing
Never really been exposed to the to the real world part of it but new it all existed and and thought you know that could be the next level for me
You know and and
Soon as I heard about it I was very very intrigued and I thought yeah, I'd like to end up there someday
And you know naive at the time in terms of what it would take to get there
But that's when the the seed was planted and it was it was a
I was almost like a little mix up when you went there because you went and you signed into the hundred and first and sort of checked on board
And once you checked on board the guys at the 160th were like you already checked on board with the hundred first
Sorry right my orders were to the hundred first I signed in and at that point they got their claws on me and I can't get out of it
And then good you know sometimes things in life happen and they end up being good even though
It's not what you wanted to have happened, but I got more experience
Went to the instructor pilot course, you know got a bunch of night vision goggle time all things
It really helped before you make that leap to the to the soft world and so then you spend that time at the hundred first
and your your
Are you figuring out more about the night stalkers at this time you learn and more?
Yeah, so that's when I run across clay hot marker
I know you know and
He actually at the time when I first met him was at W2 so he had been a Marine
I think you know the story then he was at W2 when I met him and then he got commissioned as a second lieutenant and ultimately retired
The two star generals so he just couldn't hold a job
I don't want the problem but
When I met him he
You know he knew about the unit and in fact he had gotten into the unit and brought me over there to look at the aircraft
So not only is now the mission
a seam
You know very
Full of intrigue, but the aircraft themselves have got the sexy equipment on board that I didn't even know existed
I mean we had forward looking infrared systems
I mean this is 1988
Most people didn't know
Flier even existed, you know and and it's already on the aircraft they've already got it
They have a digital cockpit
I mean it was very rudimentary from today standards, but
again, you know this is just stuff that was
Unheard of and I'm thinking so it's a super cool mission flying for these super cool customers with these
Super cool aircraft. I got to figure out how to get over here
So that that just kind of amp me up a little bit more actually and then what was the selection process?
Once you got over to
To the 160 of so I actually ended up being in the first formal green platoon that the unit ever did before my class
You'd basically just get assigned to a company and then your green platoon was
Informal just did kind of the same things, but it wasn't a dedicated class and
You know model somewhat after buds and some of the other training courses the unit realized
We need a we need a dedicated course to get people through because there's too much of a burden on the unit
The unit needs to be focused on executing you know missions and training the
The the unit level the training of new people should be done by a dedicated training organization
So they created this you know green platoon as it's called now and it includes you know all the typical stuff
The land nav physical fitness, swim test, cycle valve, lot of flying
You know life saving shooting, you know
Not at the level that you went through but you know our focus is more on the aviation part
But you get a fair amount of all that other stuff just so
You know if you end up in a situation where you're not pilot anymore you're on the ground
You're at least not a burden to the ground for as you can do something besides just sit there and say you know
Help get me home, you know
So so I think that's the main idea, you know you do some life saving stuff if you shoot a weapon that's sort of thing
And it lasted
I'm thinking it lasted nine months, so I mean it's pretty long time a lot of flying and that's the flying is usually what ends up
Weeding people out because and I think this is still the case today
The the philosophy was yeah global positioning system is great
But when it goes down you still got to be able to get your customers on the target so
We really focused heavily on land nav with a map, you know planning drawing lines on a map and being able to hit that target
Even if your systems go down and that's hard to do because especially when you start relying on the technology because then you
It's like getting over here today, you know, I mean to think about where I was going I hit Uber
Put the address in you know, I didn't even know how long it would take until I I'd punched all that stuff in
But if you rely too heavily on that you know and things really matter like you know getting
Getting soft operators on a target you got to be able to do it no matter what so there's a lot of a lot of focus on that manual stuff and
Some people just aren't very adept at that and I'm not a great navigator
I know some great navigators. I mean these guys the map like it jumps out with Adam
They they they see it different than I see it for me. It's a bunch of lines and if it's not an interstate highway
Or major body of water. I again identify it all that well
But these other guys are just unbelievable and and so you always want to be paired with one of those guys because they can they can help you
But I mean I do it well obviously well enough because I made it through the training
But it it was it was just fantastic you learn all this special mission to quit me you know like things like fast rope at the time
The army didn't do fast ropes. I don't know they do it widespread even today
So you got to learn how to do that you got to learn you know just all these different things that you learn that you didn't learn in your previous
Experience is all part of Greenblatton so when you show up you're at least a copilot you're ready to
Jump in and and serve that copilot
Position and just to give people some
Some background because we were kind of talking about it because you and I know about it
But you say in the book here to clarify what the one 60th is which is their their nickname their call sign is the night stalkers
You say this the night stalkers or strictly a special operations outfit
They had the best helicopters the latest equipment and an unlimited acquisition budget
They flew mostly at night using the latest technology night vision devices
Deep behind enemy lines racing just above sand dunes ocean waves or jungle canopies to deliver special ops teams
Their missions were hostage rescues snatching grabs a bad guy's
Even liberations of enemy equipment
Their customers were the elite of the elite and strictly can't classified
Meaning Navy seals army Rangers or other special mission units the existence of the night stalkers was officially denied
And their pilots had reputations as the James bonds of the community
If a mission was regarded as impossible the night stalkers would get it and impossible had always been seductive to me
So that's a little bit of what what what what the night stalkers do what their mission is what their mission set is
So you end up obviously you you get there
I'm gonna fast forward through the book a little bit past some of those experiences
And here we go on Sunday
December 17th I was packing up bathing suits and sun tan lotion at my house in Clarksville when my page are beeped and hummed
At the time Clay hotmocker had become my platoon leader
But he was already more than that clay lived right above lorry and me in our two family house
So he'd spent a lot of time together on and off base he was my boss, but he was also my friend
I called him to Fort Campbell and he picked up on the first ring
Hotmocker Durant come on in Roger that
I did not experience even a twinge of surprise and I quickly switched my vacation suitcase for my combat duffle
Like many special operators. I was a news junkie watching and listening international flare-ups
The way stockbrokers scan the ticks in the market. I knew that Manuel Noriega had already pushed the United States over the edge
On Saturday night four young officers had been driving downtown in Panama City in the search of the perfect pizza
Outside Noriega's military headquarters they had been stopped at a PDF roadblock
When members of the national the police
Begin beating on the car with the tons and hauling the hauling on the door handles the young Americans concluded that they were about to disappear
Into one of Noriega's notorious dungeons forever the driver hit the gas pedal as the panomanians open fire
Killing Marine first lieutenant Robert Paz
It hadn't ended there an American Navy Lieutenant Adam Curtis had witnessed the shooting incident along with his wife
Both of them were dragged off
For interrogations while Mrs Curtis was forced to assume the position against a prison cell wall and repeatedly threatened with rape
Her husband was gagged pistol whipped and kicked in the groin right in front of her
This had gone on for four hours until the battered young couple was released to collapse into a public street
Noriega's message had been clearly received in Washington
Come and get me green goes
So that's what you're getting called in for and an interesting side note here the officer the Navy officer that you talk about here Adam Curtis
He was actually a seal and
I worked with him. He was my task unit commander in a platoon and I think it was 1995 so
5 or 6 years after this happened he was my
Yeah, he was my my task unit commander
Interesting
It is a small world especially in the soft world
So
Talked us a little bit about Panama and what you did there
You know, I've said multiple times lately as I've talked about you know my my background and
Everyone knows me by black-hawked down, you know one day and it's 22 year career and if I could pick
What people knew me by it actually probably picked just cause because when you think about
What we trained for at the macro level? I mean this was it was a host of dress-gu on that mission
There was an airfield take down on that mission
Seals disabled airplanes that
Terriho's was gonna or Noriega was gonna try to get out on
It was a largest airborne drop since Vietnam down a Riojo
Apache's got used for the first time F1 17 got used for the first time. I mean it was
This was about as complicated and up as it get and it was it all went down in like 36 hours
I mean that moment you just described when I'm in my living room
We're launching on each hour a day and a half later at one o'clock in the morning
I started number looking at Donovan Bradley who I flew with on that mission and he ends up
Donovan loses life in some in Somalia
Like is this real because you know we we've been to
To prime chance which was technically a combat off but no hostility is really when we were there when I was there
Where was prime chance in the Persian Gulf the Iranians were mining the okay on the barges and we're not so we lived on the barges and
That's actually the first time that night vision goggles were used in combat
One of the guys from the one sixtieth little bird guy shot a bog hammer that was dropping mines into the sea
And use the flushet actually and one of the Iranians after they captured them is still got a flushet in his cheek
So obviously round on target
But you know for Donovan and I want to clock in the morning flying on this mission with two Apache's to go down the Rio Hado to support this airfield seizure
I mean we're sort of in disbelief, you know because how many times you get spun up and spun that you know
They were gonna go we're gonna go and then we're not going and then that 2000 pound bomb goes off at
Precisely one a. You know we all bash our our our the other services, you know
There are no engineers good as us, but I will give the Air Force credit that bomb hit
Precisely at one o'clock in the morning and it was a pretty big splash
I mean 2000 pound bomb makes a heck of a flash in the middle of night
So at that point we we realize you know this is real
But over the next you know several days
You know just amazing missions just complete success highly complex op and
Just that to me was the the ultimate special operations mission just so many facets
All done well now we took some losses, you know we we lost a couple pilots and a firefight in in
Colone daytime, you know that's always when we end up in trouble. We're in close
Trying to take on people that you can't see
There's a lot of ways to shoot a helicopter down and unfortunately this little bird got shot down a couple of days later
Both pilots were killed, but but overall
Just an incredible mission and you know ultimately we do end up getting men one or yaga and
He gets flown out actually by Cliff Walcott who was flying with Jonathan Briley and Somalia when he lost his life
So they were all one you know just one band of brothers, you know and
Being able to participate and knows kind of ops and I actually ended up supporting
Seals
On the on the Colone side that was that was my mission we were
You know trying to find Noria. We call it the hunt for Elvis you know because they were Elvis sightings all over the place
You know we get people we call it and say yeah, he's over here and we go
It wasn't quite that you know the helicopter but there were several missions where we thought
Okay, this is legit intel you know it's legit a minute enough to launch and we would take a place down and
He was never there but finally, you know as as
Most people know we found him hiding and he eventually gave up and we flew them out
What was that what was the total time that you spent down there?
Well oddly enough I departed early because I had to go teach green plateau
I got to the point in the unit where I was now teaching others scary scary thought
But
And I had to go back and and start the training you know things were starting to wind down
I think Noria had been located and that the number of direct action missions was was scaling back
You know we had control of the whole country so there wasn't any need to really
You know keep flying as many missions that we had been flying so the commander decided hey go back
Teach Green poll two and so I was only there
Probably a week I mean you know to get all that done in a week that's why I say
If there was something that I could be known for I wish it was that mission because it really was amazing
But that is just a footnote in history for most of us. Yeah, well the good thing is in the book
You detail you go through a lot of those details talk about what those missions were like
Yeah, it's it's it's really good for me to read it because I I only ever got debriefed on like
What the seal specifically did so it was very cool to hear from your perspective and see what I'll bunch of the other units
Including you know your unit right good to see
Um
I wanted to say something and if I forget to say it later. I really appreciate how
Complimentary you you were in extreme ownership about the conventional army units that you work with because you know a lot of times
We at least in my era there wasn't a lot of combat experience so for us the special ops guys
Kind of looked down on those and that was wrong and I I always felt you know after the fact that there was
Immatured on my part to kind of look at them that way because they just didn't have the experience. They just hadn't done it, you know, but you know, but you know
To hear your perspective on you know battle hardened
Convention on units out there kicking ass just like everybody else. I was just really appreciate that. That was good stuff
Well, I'd I'd love to take some kind of credit for for that
But when we were we were lucky enough to be in those situations where I mean I was just working side by side with those guys
And and there was just no doubt in there in their professionalism in their bravery and it was it
An honor to be able to serve alongside them and not even just active duty army and Marine Corps, but you know when we got to
Ramadi in 2006 it was a national guard national guard on the ground and they were they were
Doing an incredible job taking the fight to the enemy and and they you know I told Colonel Gronski he came on this podcast
100% my some of my guys are alive because the lessons that we learned from the national guard when we showed up there
And then when the one one AD showed up 100% some of my guys are alive because when we called they came the one one
AD whatever battalion came and there was multiple over and over again
So we owe so much to those guys and and we won't ever forget them, but I think you're right
You know when I was in the sealed teams in the 90s, you know, we we we definitely were
I think partially just ignorant and and and partially arrogant right
Well, they just they hadn't been to war so you know in our minds we're the real world guys and they're just practicing right
But they they and you think about national guard in particular
I mean most national guard units had not deployed you know prior to 911 for decades
Yeah, to know that they ramped up like this amazing they did indeed as a tribute to an attack
It's a testament to the American war fighter
Fast forward a little bit more
You end up in the first Gulf War right you say here the word been ramping up since the Iraqis invaded Kuwait and August
Those of us who had been invited were pleased to be there no one was happier about it than Cliff Walcott
His innovative concept the direct action penetrator
Configuration of the black off Hawk which had missed the party in Panama was finally going to see some action
However, while Charlie company in it's and its daps that's the direct action penetrator had drawn us the assignment to provide four of the gunships for
Skud hunting they didn't have enough qualified pilots for this operation so five of us from Delta company myself Cliff clay hot
mocker Eddie mole and Stan Wood have been called upon to complete the package
So this is kind of a new deal the outfitted these these black cocks with more weapon systems
So they could they could bring some firebour more firebour right
You know the unit doesn't have a patchy so
What we were trying to do is is provide a patchy like capability
But not have to have a dedicated platform because that that's the issue right if you can only put so many birds on a C5
If you could put one on there that could do both the attack mission and the assault mission
That gives a ground force commander a lot more opportunity to you know to react
So he was a brilliant idea and I'm actually
Shocked that it hasn't and it taken on more of a life certainly with international
Black Hawk operators because it's essentially two for one. I mean you're getting an attack helicopter and an assault helicopter
And having been there
You know a day one when this whole concept was put together and Cliff was the godfather. I mean he he was a cober guy and
He just you know from the moment he started flying black cocks
I think I got a figure out a put guns on this thing
You know this is a waste of my time and
And we finally did it today. I mean the thing is got I mean it looks like a easy one 30
It's got stuff all over the place yeah
I'm gonna fast forward a little bit here you're out on an operation your scud hunting
Zulu three two this is Charlie seven Charlie four seven
It was lieutenant Colonel Doug Brown
Battalion commander of the first baton of the 160th making contact from the jock in a roar
Roger four seven I answered go ahead. I have a mission change for you three two. He said Colonel Brown's voice was
Usually cold as ice water but on this night he actually sounded a little keyed up copy these coordinates
Roger that I said as
And as Lance continued the lazy orbit over the activities below I repeated the coordinates back to Brown
You are cleared to direct to the target three two the Colonel ordered target is a possible
And he couldn't hear him
Transmission of broken up on the last word four seven I said say again all after coordinate
Roger that brown answered I say again. It is a crossword
The sack calm failed again. I fumed I keep the mic button once more
47 you're breaking up please spell all after and he said Sierra Charlie uniform delta brown growled
And then you knew it was a scud and again this is interesting because
The individual that you're talking about lieutenant Colonel Doug Brown ended up being the four star
So calm commander in charge of all special operations and when he was in that job
I was actually the admiral's aid for Admiral Joe McGuire and
We would see General Brown all the time and did a bunch of trips with him and got to know him
Just what a great guy. He was as well. Yeah, you know, you say he's usually cold as ice water super
I mean just super unemotional very very calm laid back and here you are half this opportunity to get these scuds and
So I gotta tell you just remind of me I'm actually writing this down on my knee board because we have a knee board
And you know he sent the coordinates I got to write those down and then he's I'm trying to figure out what neck is he saying and then he does it phonetically
And I still remember
See it's like a game show, you know, oh
Yeah, I got it Scott for a hundred dollars
But the first one that you went to go
Attack your weapons didn't work right? Yes
Talked through that so that's gotta be just a little bit frustrating because it's just cool the scuds at the time
Because I was in the Navy now, but the scuds with his huge threat like this was the major threat
That they had they could arm him with chemical weapons. It was this that was the big focus you heard all the news all the time
Was scuds scuds good scuds good? We got to get these scuds. We got to stop these scuds and they had launch scuds
And so here you are you finally get one of these scuds and you got your your new air craft with all of its weapons on it and you roll in to shoot that thing
What happens?
Nothing
I
Gives my my potter get wet. I don't know what happened. No, we know what happened. So
I'm flying and I push the trigger and nothing happens and
I come around again and I'm flying with Lansing all who you mentioned a moment ago and
I'm like check the switches so he checks the switches because you know there's a lot of stuff you got to do and
You can do something incorrectly and it's not armed technically and I come around again
I push the trigger still nothing. What are you trying to engage with?
So all we had was miniguns 7.62 which are formidable, but you know, I mean that's not a typical
Tag helicopter weapon, but we used them in a fixed forward mode, so you're diving fire on the target
And then rockets. I mean so normally our profile would be you start shooting the minifurst and then you fire
Now the rockets they're they're free flying aerial rockets FFAR so they're not guided and they come out of the two
Move and kind of slow so they're hard to hit a
Precise target weapon
So we always use the minigun first and then we follow that with rockets once we knew you know
We were kind of aligned on the target and if you did it enough you got pretty good at it
You could you could hit a point target like a vehicle
Fairly off not every time
So I'm trying to hit you know obviously minigun first and then I'm gonna go to rockets and I try I'm both the need of one works
So
I look at lands and I said plants it's one
F and switch arm it you know
I figured it had to be him you know
It can't be the aircraft so we come around again. It still doesn't work. I mean I'm so upset
It's like a quite a two if you're a hunter
This is the biggest buck you've ever seen in your life the biggest buck the entire nation
Yes, I want to you to hunt this buck and he's standing there just chew and you know
Stationary broadside and you can't chew I mean it was unreal
I got so upset again, you know, I should I've been probably not but I think I said something like I'm crashing is freaking
Aircraft
You're going comma causing
That's what you're saying the fuck
I just was that upset and
Unfortunately, you know, we're gonna flight it to aircraft so the other aircraft is just making these same orbits and shooting
And I'm not only I as it that I can't shoot, but I'm watching him shoot and he can't shoot nearly as good as me
And he's not even hitting the target so I see you've making me more furious
But in the end, you know no damage done
There there's some speculation that they were actually decoys
I don't know if you're gonna mention that later, but which it didn't really matter
I mean, no we want to blow the shit out of this day no matter whether it's a decoy or not and that was a long flight haul
I mean that that was a painful flight haul
And of course, you know all your buds what do they think?
Right, oh, yeah, you dorked it up
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah
You know you guys screwed it up. What was wrong with the aircraft?
That was just some little technical problem. Yeah, I mean we sort of through this thing together
I mean it hadn't been through rigorous testing or anything like that and and it was an electronic component that was overheating and failing
After being turned on for two hours and we just didn't know because we'd never flown long long missions with it before
We'd always crank up turn it on go shoot work fine, but if you flew for two hours it overheated and didn't work anymore
Eventually you guys did get a scud they talk about that in there
You talk about that in there the war ended
Over pretty quick obviously, but at the same time, you know much like in Panama
You you you he low went down
You lost Mike Anderson and Chuck Cooper
Chris Chapman and
Mario Vega Velazquez and another special operator and they went down lost those guys
You get done with that and then it's redeployed back to America after that one
You got I mean going in the 90s 80s and 90s getting like real world experience in both Panama and then going over to the person golf
That's
That's freaking legit for back then. Oh, it was that's why we were arrogant
I mean that was the unfortunate effect of all that because even in the unit
They were guys that just didn't end up on their on the rotation so they don't have they might have been there 15 years
But they don't have the combat experience that that was painful for a little man. Yeah, I
That's that's a nightmare. Yeah, that's it. I got very very lucky my whole career
I got very lucky my whole career and I always always on the the lucky side not the unlucky side
You know standard round cone. I wish I would have been there for that not including the first goal for which I'm
Mess because I'm still in training
But yeah, that had to be an interesting
dynamic in the locker room
I know the the Vietnam guys so we used to call new guys if you hadn't been on deployment
Then you were new guy and as soon as you went on your first deployment didn't really wear matter where you went
Then you weren't a new guy anymore, but the Vietnam guys
Unless you were in combat you were new guys, so you could have been new guy in their mind for 10 years
Yeah, cherry boy right like they would bring it to some of those old Vietnam guys
All right, I'm gonna fast forward a little bit
Somalia October 3rd
It was a perfect day for prayer a bright and tranquil Sunday morning the skies and seas were polished blue soft winds
Bore civil sea silver edge clouds and the coastal sand's gleamed white like ribbons of salt
It would have been easy to believe it in some sort of heavenly power
But for the most of us in task force ranger the helicopter pilots and our crews the eager young rangers and the
squint-eyed special forces the muscled armors and whiz kid intelligence analysts the all these
mornings in Mogadishu all ran together a Sabbath day felt hardly different than any other bleeding into the workweek
Like the steamy bleached beaut uh, Hughes of the African Vista sure
A few guys knelt before the army chaplain with heads bowed praying for salvation
The rest of us prayed for another mission
How long have you been in Somalia at that point so we get through the end of August so we've been there about six weeks
I mean and and what was your up tempo like pretty heavy?
I mean we flew most of the time we're flying every day every night now wasn't ops every time
We were flying these things called signature flights because we're trying to decensatize the enemy
You know because obviously if you're the bad guys and you're watching your field and a flight of
25 helicopters takes off that's a clue right but if you fly in every day and every night then it they become sort of more
Blivia's to it and that was the theory so and then you know a lot of the operator guys wanted to see the city from the air
And you know the more you fly around an area the more familiar you get so you're more likely to get on target
the way you need to so all that combined meant we were flying just about every day and every night
Going into three October when you how often would you conduct an actual mission like a hit
So October third is is my eighth
Real op in six weeks how often were the guys getting contacted on these previous operations like enemy contact firefight
Someone it started to ramp up you know on the first couple nothing because we had the element of surprise
But after the first few like on I think it's mission five
We're we're trying to capture the number two guy guy name Osmond Otto and
Daytime mission again and
We're going into the compound where he was he was actually there and
RPGs are exploding in the air as we're on the way in and it was enough
Firefighting going on on the ground that we actually didn't go back into the compound to pull the operators out
We went to an alternate pick up zone because it was just too too hot
So you know I would say about halfway into the sequence the the the Somali started to get a little bit more
Bullage rent
You know plus the the big difference is if you had a target two o'clock in the morning you're in and out
You're probably not gonna get a whole lot, but if you go in the daytime when everybody's up and around
That's when you tend to get into a little bit more of a scrape and that's the kind of hot play now
Yeah, I was trying to get a feel for you know
Like I only did a two-to-poilment so I rack but you know my first deployment
obviously those are my first real missions and
Like the mindset of how long it took to where we as a platoon felt like yeah
This is what we're doing sort of like this is our job. This is I don't want to say mechanical
But we just were well rehearsed and we just we were just doing our job and it was like doing any other job
It didn't take that long
You know we because we were doing a lot of operations. We basically go and out almost every night and doing another hit another hit
So you do that five six eight times all right
What's the next target and you kind of getting that mode and it sounds like you were you all were getting getting in that mode
Where this is what we're doing. We know how to do it
Lessons that we're being learned and you make little adjustments and you were there. Yeah, I think we got there pretty quick
Because we'd rehearse quite a bit back at Fort Bragg
I mean we had role players and compounds built and all kinds of stuff for you know
What we thought it was gonna be once we got there some of that was on target. Some of it was not but by the time we actually deployed
We were we had it pretty well down
Fast forward a little bit in the bustling jock the mission was developing very rapidly
We couldn't wait to see if our targets would just hang around drinking tea and bullshitting about women and weather
We couldn't hope to have a CIA asset wander into the target building snap a covert photo of the party and also back out with a
100% confirmation we had to go on information and belief and faith
But in a special ops environment no element leader can afford to be shy about offering solutions or raising dilemmas
I was a combat vampire who loved the night
But I held my piece about the risk of a daylight up because there was no other option
Yet a number of other officers quickly voiced issues to a background score of distant helo turbines
Winding up and desert combat boots thumping across the tarmac like heavy hail sir someone said to General Garrison
I've got some ex-fail issues. What's on your mind?
Okay air expiltration is not an option so we're forced to use the ground convoy
But I think we might wrap it up long before the vehicles are on position
We'll be there when you're ready said Colonel McNight has lightly armored humvies and five ton trucks
We're already assembled to move to a rendezvous point near the Olympic hotel. I wondered if the hotel had a single client this year or ever
But that but the place is nasty with skinis today someone else said using the nickname for hostile semallies
We might get boxed in on the return
Ex-fail by airs a negative another pilot stated firmly the plan called for the helo is to hover it about 30 feet
Uncoil fast ropes and let the de boys and Rangers slide down them like firemen on slick poles
But there was nowhere to land our choppers and pick them up
We could do a rooftop extraction
But like we saw in the last mission hovering up there like sitting ducks makes us very vulnerable to RPG gunners
And there's an antenna tower on the target building an SF officer jabbed at a video monitor with his glove finger
We'd have to blow it before the helo came back in and it'll take time
Don't sweat it boys midnight said to his Ranger officers your convoy will be there and if it's not garrison-grinned
Around his cigar stub the helo's will come in and pull your asses out like they always do and that was it
We've been there for all of 10 minutes
Was this like TST time sensitive target where it came up real quick? Yeah
In fact we were planning a training up we were gonna go shoot because we had the daps there
But we hadn't used them yet and you know ammunition gets all least that's what we told the commander
It's like beer in the fridge you know if you don't consume it it's gonna go bad
So we were gonna do some shooting and that's why I was in the job
We were planning that flight and
This thing developed so fast I actually didn't have time to go back to my bunk and get my knee board
I just went without it because we filmed this thing so many times I didn't need it anyway
But yeah, so from the time we found out that you know these personnel were identified to off off the ground was
Definitely less than an hour maybe 40 minutes to get the whole entourage up and going crank all those birds and brief everybody
I mean it seems like a lot of time. That's not a lot of time at all. Yeah
the
You were the daytime portion of it the fact that you were going out in the day you say you like going out the night
But it was the target that was driving you to do this during the day
They were there you had a pretty good confirmation not a hundred percent like you said in the book, but a pretty decent confirmation and
That's it they're there. We're gonna go get him. Yeah. I mean there was a guy in the ground and he
gave the signal that meant you know positive ID and
And at that point your decision is you know we take the risk and go or we wait and then they move and we lose them and
That's you know that's the commander's decision. I don't I don't question it
I probably would have made the same call
But you know unfortunately it's three o'clock in the afternoon and we can't use the you know the advantage that we have with all of our night vision technology
Yeah, it's a crazy advantage. It's a crazy advantage
I know of we did a lot of daytime operate my my second deployment did a lot of daytime operations
My first deployment we did limited daytime operations for that very reasons we go into a clock in the morning
There's no no no factor no resistance but sometimes same exact thing we'd get hey this guy is here now
In this market and this village and this building we just we would go
So there's there's definitely an elevated risk
During the day and the tactical advantage they have a night at night can't be cannot be understated at all
Right actually there were four risks. I talked about these all the time
Because I was a flight lead so that means I'm I'm I'm actually in the planning
You know and in the final decision making process with the general garrison and all the element commanders and
The four risks at least from a heel perspective identified as as you know for first the foremost daytime
Second one we can't lend the heels like you just talked about so we can we have to fast rope in and we can't do an easy extraction
The third one is that we've done this six times before and the fourth one is it's in the worst part of the city
This is right where all the bad guys hang out they call it the blacksy area
So all four of those things were identified and people asked me because there was a lot of criticism after the fact
You know should have gone shouldn't have gone
But you know when you're in the moment it's it's like often uses a quarterbacks as an example
It's easy to criticize that quarterback for throw that interception, but when you're in the moment and that receivers open and you know
There's a lot on the line this third down
You know you need to touch down bad and you throw that ball
You can't you can't criticize that decision. I mean that decision was made in the moment and you don't know
You know that the receivers gonna fall because he slipped on a
Just like piece of grass, you know you're making a decision based on what you know at the time and and I would never criticize
General Garrison for making that call and I always tell people not of us felt great
But I think we all felt comfortable enough. We went out there saying all right, you know
This is not gonna be probably like most the other ones, but we're we're comfortable enough
And you had done a daytime operation or other daytime operations. Yeah, and so you had thrown those passes before and they were caught by the receiver
Like you intended and hey, we're gonna do it again because we've done it before
hindsight is always 20
And again you got to buy this book because there's there's more details and there obviously I'm not covering the whole thing
I'm fast-moin a little bit here the Rangers and the Delta Force guys being inserted
And here's your perspective. I brought super six for you as low as possible to a 24-hover using a utility pole straight down through the chin
Bubble as my reference ropes. I called over my the intercom my crew chief Tommy Bill echoed me loud and the thick green
Housers were deployed
It was a well-rehearsed routine all I had to do is keep it steady holding the forward left box position with chalk two right behind me
chalk three a beam to the right and chalk four right behind him
But the pilot of the last chopper super six seven had been flying sea two bird until today
Just up there boring holes in the sky and this was his first encounter with the with the brown monster the dust cloud
Most more than a hundred feet high and he felt his way down to it like a waiter tip-towing into an ice cold lake
He deployed his ropes too early and they were 30 only 30 feet long a Ranger went out his door
Lost his grip on the rope and fell into oblivion
It was right there and then that the mission started to unravel like the hem of an old sweater as you tug on one
Loose strand but I didn't know any of that at the time. I was having problems of my own
Right ropes hung up on a wire. It was Bill's voice in my ear dead common steady telling me
We'd snagged on probably the last telephone wire still intact and Mogadissue of all the damn phone lines in the city
I fought forward 10 bill offered a correction as he peered down past as many gun at
At the snare to hauser and I carefully nudged the helo forward
Holdy saying I could tell by his tone that the rope was dangling straight and free and I held it steady while our 18 Rangers
Leap for the lines like comic book heroes
I could hear steals chalk leader barking go go go and the butt plates of M16's and M60 light machine gun scraping and banging against my floor
As the troops dove into the desk dust storm
Within seconds they were all gone
Good luck guys. I whispered as Bill and Tommy trip the releases and the ropes fell from their mounts like limp cobras
None of us had a clue that those young Rangers were in for the fight of their lives
ropes clear Tommy announced and I hauled the helo into a rising left bank as I keep my mic
Super six four is out and that was it. I thought it was over
You go out to a holding pattern now and
Like other operations that you've gone on that's you go out in your holding pattern everyone the boys on the ground do what the boys on the ground do
Didn't take them very long seem did they they were getting the target secured getting the principles
You know taken get them controlled get them blindfolded get them cuffed
That Ranger that had fallen he was critically injured on top of that
You you learn that
He will they weren't near their designated area
Either and I was watching some video
Though that brownout situation was great. I've been in Tana Brownout
I guess it was because it was in the city brownout. Is that what made it worse? Yeah because if you land in the desert
There's a technique that we learn where you almost like land like an airplane
Right you come down and you get a little bit of ground roll and you stay ahead of the cloud
But you can't do that in the city. I mean you're in it. Yeah
So you got to find some kind of reference and like I was talking about my reference was there was a pole right there
And that's about all I could see but at least it was enough to maintain the position
But you know the further back you are in the flight the worst of gets because you got yours and
Everybody else is in front of you that you're dealing with so and that guy's defense
He was he had the worst of it and unfortunately is a little bit inexperienced. Yeah, and in an open desert the the dust has somewhere to go
You know it'll it'll
Expand out to this or expand out to the sides and you could see on these videos
I was watching that dust has nowhere to go. So it's going straight back up in the air. Right. There's the biggest dust clouds
I've seen massive it was it was pretty rough, but we had we had gotten the technique down pretty well at that point
Unfortunately he had had much experience with it
You're in you're now monitoring radius where do you want one net?
We you on monitoring the ground net and the internet was their multiple nets or we wrong one net multiple nets
Yeah, we I always
I make up this phrase but go to helmet fire when things go really crazy and every net is just
You know lid up we've got five radios in our head
So it gets pretty ugly because there's there's a there's a command net. There's air to air net
There's air to ground net. There's a fires net and
And sometimes you can even listen to the tactical commanders net if you want to so that's a lot of stuff to keep track of and and you know as long as there's not much going on
It works. Thanks. Why but wouldn't
Crap starts happening. It gets it gets pretty hard to decipher
I had in my
Plotoons in my task you weren't allowed to talk on the radio like you weren't a lot like everybody knew
They wouldn't say something on the radio unless it was no possible other way of communicating it for this
Very reason because when things will go sideways everyone if they think they can just start talking about what's important them
The nets get cluttered up and then you put five nets of that
It was another one that I would have never thought about before but there's a think all the CEO
I you know for those who aren't familiar with it would basically
Give you the call signs and frequency and all this stuff so like in the CEO
I your unit would be one designation and then you're rolling that unit would be another let's just say x-ray
6-7 that means that's x-ray unit and 6-7 is the commander. Well in another unit it might be Zulu
6-7
But what people started doing in in in in the chaos was abbreviate
6-7 so which freakin 6-7 is this you know and and it really kind of oh expose the wheat is at least from my perspective
And that's probably not a great way to do this and you know it needs to be
Structured differently and I don't know whether I ever got resolved
But it's the only experience I ever had where people started just abbreviating who they were and you just lost track
Because it's just too much going on yeah and especially pilots
They talk real smooth and quick and fast and they're almost immediately
They'll dump the first part of their call sign when you start talking to them right right that's just habitual for them
We got to get the crew to get their train tables up before you
You got to be able to get it out
Going back to the book
The ex-ville convoy we started to take heavy murderous fire
We've lost a five-ton truck
I heard that and ray and I'd glance at each other the ground transmissions were broken and hard to understand
We switched radios for better reception things were starting to heat up down there
But we just sat there and breathed and flew around and around waiting
I knew Cliff Walcott and his called copilot Donovan Briley
We're back in there with super six one giving fire support from three SF shooters on board and their crew chiefs many guns
From what I could gather as I squinted straining to hear the samallies were coming from every doorway and from behind every wall
But all we could do is sit up there and our safe haven feeling helpless while our people were in deep shit and we knew it
Super six one is going down. It was Cliff's voice
He was talking about himself and his own hero something and hit his bird and he and Donovan were going to crash
I swallowed disbeliefing what I'd heard super six one is going down Cliff Walcott and Donovan Briley were real good friends of mine
We were all from the same platoon. We were close
We'd been together for a long time traveled on the road together party together our families knew each other very well
I shook it off. They'll be all right. I decided that'll have to land maybe a hard landing or something
But the star bird will fly in and pick them up and we'll all go home
The possibility that Cliff and Donovan might die didn't cross my mind. I couldn't see them from my position
So I painted it the way I needed to see it at the moment as it was an RPG
Round had blown a bitch big chunk off their bird
They started spinning out of control while Donovan shut down the engines and Cliff tried to get the aircraft on the ground to one piece
But those damn narrow streets the heelos smack down on a reinforced concrete wall
Pivoted and crashed nose first in those few seconds everything changed the radios
Which up till now at his the occasional code word or updates went crazy?
Sure we'd all prepared for the possibility of a bird going down
But the timing and location were about as bad as they could be
The ground assault element with prisoners already until was order to regrow
Grig group at the fresh crash site the exville convoy suddenly had a new and even more deadly
Labyrinth to fight through air elements were being summoned for support. It was now constant chatter back and forth
The voice is still steady, but ominously urgent
On this mission the worst had happened. We had a bird down and the survivors were surrounded
Are you aware of casualties at this point? I'm not in fact the part that still tough for me to
Process is I did not know that Cliff and Donovan had died until I actually got released from captivity
And I'm laying there in in the field hospital and all the guys come over to see me and I'm looking around
I like where's Cliff and Donovan and the commander start crying. I mean
It was just you don't think you can happen, you know, and you know
I think back to some of the other options you were talking about it
You just look over in their bumps there, you know, and they're not there anymore. It's just it's just
I don't know it's hard it's hard to
It's hard to describe if you haven't lived it, you know, to see the impact that that has and then then you come back and you see their families
You know, we're still in touch. I just saw Donovan's wife and daughter about it. We can have a go and
You know the holes never felt it's gone forever and
Just amazing great Americans and honor to have served them
When you when you compare your mindset at the time clearly you know that things are going bad
Was it possible for you to tell how bad they were going with the with the situation that the ground force was in?
I mean they were getting
smashed
Will you aware of that?
Well, there was a lot of talk on the net, but you know with the bird down that's gonna happen anyway, so and I am a bit of an eternal optimist
And I'm thinking yeah, all right this speed bump, you know, I mean we'll get through this we just got to clean this up
Never in my wildest dreams would have thought that you know Cliff and Donovan had already been killed or the things that were going on on the ground
The fatalities that already been taken
There wasn't a lot of talk about losses yet on the radio that I did I had heard anyway
But you know obviously it ramps up pretty quick here a few minutes
Going back to the book here kernel math used called me on the net six four I need you to go and take six ones play so over the target
I was expecting that call the come we had practiced this exact contingency just a few days before the mock shoot down of six one
And I was rolling in I was rolling out of holding even as I answered Roger six for going in
Even with everything I knew now my mind's eye flashing me on holy images my hands and feet didn't his
Hasidate we broke formation known in the helicopter set of word ray Tommy Bill and I all knew what had just happened to our friends
One bird was down in the city another was hit and the ground force was decisively engaged
We were playing for keeps on this one. I broke silence on the inner column and make it a little sticky in there
Let's all keep our heads in the game
There was no response
I had it back for the target site at full power running right along the rooftops
We were going to provide fire support for the ground elements, but I realized that everyone had been
Told now to consolidate at the crash site platoon squads and sections would be racing door to door toward that new position
It would be very hard to distinguish friend from foe and such a melee
We couldn't just cowboy in their spewing 4,000 rounds a minute
Tommy and Bill's electrically controlled miniguns could be armed only by me throwing a switch in the cockpit
I spoke to them very carefully
Okay, I said I'm arming your guns, but we're not doing any shooting until we figure out where everyone is
Roger that they grunted Raj
Within seconds we were back over the target area flying a wide circular pattern trying to locate cliffs clad crash site and clearly spot the enemy before we opened up on him
We were in a hard left bank with me up high in the right seat
So I was peering past Ray and down into total confusion it was just smoke and dust and indistinguishable sprinting forms
I tried to raise super six two cliff and dawn of in the wingman
But the air to air net was jammed up and the AMC kept telling us to vary our pattern and minimize exposure time
I janked it up and down getting high getting low trying to make us hard to hit all to aware that the
Somali's were now shooting at us from every rooftop and street corner
Something slammed into my helicopter and that's where we opened this up
That's where we started the podcast
This I was again I was watching some videos the the actual videos and there's freaking Somali's everywhere
I you because you're seeing different angles and there's just Somali's everywhere and they were just lighting up everyone and everything and all the birds
What's crazy about this whole thing you know again you have a picture of the map and in this in the book
It's like a mile away two miles away this whole thing
Is all I mean you you're out at sea hovering in your safe spot and
And seconds later you're over the target
How long we over the target for before before you got hit not long we made it around about three times and you know
You touched on it but the hard part for us is trying to figure out what's going on on the ground
I mean you can't just
hose everybody down right so and and I don't think people can appreciate how hard it is being in a helicopter because
So I tell them if you want to get some perspective on what this is like
Go to a big city somewhere and drive down through the heart of town in the middle of the night going 90 miles an hour
And see how much situational awareness you can get on the side streets as you go by them
That's essentially the same thing so you can't really tell you didn't get you didn't get a look at it long enough
Because the angles are constantly changing and you see a person here
But then by the time you get a chance to figure out is that a threat is that a friendly?
They're gone. I mean you're you're you're you're past them
So we you know how long is it take to get around about three times? I don't know maybe two minutes and
We were not even close to the point where we felt like we could shoot. I mean that's a that weapon, you know
I'm just gonna tear the place up so we we never fired around I
Have you been to foul in Nevada flying up there? So I was like a new guy and I was a radio man when I was in
List of guy and so I was always calling the helos for extract and stuff and I was calling him
He was it was daytime. I'm calling in helos. We're in foul Nevada. So this is a desert environment. It's open desert and there's some little shrubs
But not much and I'm calling this helicopter and I'm looking and they are not far away and I have like probably a little
Three foot or maybe four foot by four foot aircraft panel and so I go hey, you know
I mark you identify and I'm sitting there looking they they couldn't been more than 200 yards away
Maybe 300 yards away. It's a freaking giant helicopter. I'm holding up this aircraft panel bright orange
Aircraft panel for them to see me and they're like we don't see you and I'm thinking about
What do you get me there's two aircraft? I got a squad of seals out here there's eight seals
Sure, we're wearing camouflage, but we feel completely naked. I'm thinking if you would have asked me to put money
I would have bet you know two months pay that this that this these helicopters can see us a hundred
percent and I'm gonna hold this aircraft panel up they couldn't see us. It is so different when you're up there
So different when you're up there and we they didn't find that those two helos didn't find us until we popped purple smoke
And then they will oh yeah, we got you
It was crazy so what you are seeing when you're in the air and you're moving it's really hard to figure out what's going on down there
Yeah, it was impossible
We probably could have orbited for 20 minutes and would have not had full situation awareness
Would you gotta have because I mean
You know the the the the fratricide is not acceptable no matter what I mean and when that was our biggest concern
So you go down
Fast forward I woke up in the silence of my own grave at least that's what I believed in that first moment because the last flash of
Consciousness I had clearly seen the clawing hand of the grim reaper
I did not know where I was I did not know who I was it was like emerging from an altitude chamber with a case of
Hypocce as my mind begin to stagger slowly through the dark dark and hallways of my concussed brain
When my eyelids finally flooded open I was stunned to take in light
The choppers windshield was almost completely gone
Peerston disintegrated by a slab of corrugated metal that had stopped only inches from my face
Yet my first sense of emotion wasn't relief but a fury at the disfiguring of my helicopter by that rusty blade
I reached up to shove the thing from my pocket and then pain swept over me like a wave of molten lava
My back was broken two of my vertebraids smack together on impact displacing the discs between and
Polverizing each other every muscle my back must have tried to prevent that catastrophe and been ripped apart in the effort
And it felt like some evil giant had a grip on me
I stopped moving and just tried to breathe without passing out
I sure as hell was fully conscious now although my thoughts and reflexes seemed to trudged through a
Sort of syrupy fog slowly I moved my aching hand and clenched around the cockpit and found I was sitting level with the floor
The seats in the blackhawk are designed to stroke downward and a major cross crash and mine had done that and more
My right leg felt strangely numb and as soon as I tried to move it
I knew that the femur had broken clean and half over the edge of my Kevlar seat my m9 pistol was still strapped in my right thigh
And it and it's a way shifted I could feel splintered ends of my bones grinding against one another
But it didn't hurt all that much my crushed a vertebrae where monopolizing my pain centers
I was dead sure that I couldn't get myself out of the cockpit
They blackhawks hard enough to get out of when you're healthy you have to control yourself on maneuvering your limbs around the seat and the controls
I could barely move I saw my MP5 submachine gun lying on the floor near my left foot where I left it as I reached forward
I made sure it was cocked and locked and laid it across my lap
I could hear some thin muffled shouts in the distance the samallies would surely try to overrun us and it looked like I just have to fight it out right there
Where I sat and then I remembered I wasn't alone
I looked over at Ray his helmet was gone and he was slowly edging himself off his seat
Which had collapsed in the floor just like mine the acreed smell of spilled jet fuel mix with dry dust was in the air
And I heard someone moaning unintelligible from the back of the chopper. It was Bill Cleveland's voice
But nothing he muttered made any sense. There wasn't a sound from Tommy Field Ray looked at me
I tried to pull them off
He meant the injured engines. I know it couldn't do it
I glanced up at the power control levers. You got him halfway
He didn't say anything for a moment and then left to be his broken. I think right femur here and and my back too
Yeah, he said and then he slowly maneuvered himself until he was sitting in the door sill with his back to me
I'm moving Mike he said I'll be right here
Ray nodded and then he gripped the sill with his hands and carefully lowered himself to the ground
I couldn't see him any anymore and I would never see him again
I knew we were about to be in the battle for our lives
We were down in the middle of Mogadishu and there was no doubt in my mind that the samallies were coming for us
You can't
There's no way for you to get out of the helicopter at this point. No
It's like it's that you know to get in and out of about 60 you got a got a twist and bend and you know sling your leg over the cyclic and
I can't and there's just no way so I decided I'm gonna fight it out from right there and your femurs broken your back is
totally jacked up
Can you hear some alleyes in the distance? No, it was you know what I think when you aircraft first hit
Obviously quite the event in this neighborhood
You know there's 20,000 pound machine crashes from the sky so I think they all ran initially and then you know over time
They started to kind of
Sneak their way back in trying to figure out what was going on. Did you know where you were?
Generally but I mean if you know if you'd ask me at that moment put my finger on a map I
Wouldn't have gotten all that close. I don't think
Fast forward a little bit just then
Randy Schuckart and Gary Gordon appeared on the right side of our chopper
They would delta operators and although I didn't know them personally or by name
I certainly knew who they were
More than once I'd brief them and the other members of their teams prior to assaults in the city
Since they were wearing no helmets I recognize them instantly Randy was carrying a high-tech sniper rifle and Gary had a car 15
The short-barled version of the M16 assault rifle and their load bearing harnesses were slung with ammunition and grenades
Brandy and Gary didn't say very much. They knew the situation was critical and they were there to work not chat
They asked me about my injuries
Well my like my right legs broke and I said and I think my back
Uh-huh
They nodded and set themselves in position to lift me out of the cockpit
They raised me up gently
So they take you they carry you out of the cockpit and put you in a in a position
Where you're gonna have to stay because you can't move
You say super six four sat in the pale dirt. It's belly smeared in the ground. It's big rotors dead still
And drooping like wilted palm fronds. I couldn't see anyone in the cargo bay Tommy
Tommy fields minigun it's swung around hard and struck him full in the chest upon impact
It was a very heavy weapon and crushed his entire rib cage
Something else inside the chopper had torn up build Cleveland really bad just in front of them and to my right was a long shack and a large tree
It's high leaves rustling in the hot wind and throwing some shade into me
The only open area was between between me that shack and my heel
My heel is cockpit a clear field of fire Randy and Gary knew what they were doing
They handed me my MP5 and the single spare magazine a total of 60 rounds of 9 millimeter ammo
But they didn't say a word as they walked off around the nose of the helicopter
I
Her bills voice again and twisted my head around shoe cart Gordon had placed him on the ground behind me
He was still in coherent and great pain
Some of his flight gear had been removed and his trousers were soaked in blood
I suddenly missed my family very much especially my young son Joey
I did not want to die here and even as I fought it the fear began to well up. I was badly injured and scared
And there was no doubt about it. I did not want to fall in the hands of the samallies just a few weeks before
They'd overrun some Nigerian troops and rumors about what they had done to them were too gruesome to believe
And the samallies had done that to fellow Africans so I couldn't even imagine what they might do to us
The image of mutilation that flashed into my mind terrified me
Randy and Gary came back around the nose the helo. I wasn't sure what they were doing but they is suit
But I assumed they were looking for an area large enough to land an aircraft and get us out of there
They were common deliberate talking to each other like a couple of surveyors planning a new parking lot
But I knew they were frustrated
They had four badly injured men on their hands and it was impossible to move even a short distance
So there's a little calm almost before the storm at this juncture. There is
Again, I don't think the small is hadn't organized yet. They were still just kind of coming back in ones
He Tuesdays and I think that people that lived in that area
It may not have been you know part of the hobby we get our clan or we're in armed
They just had to live there but once we're got out that there was an aircraft down that was lightly defended and surrounded
Then they got an organized group to come that way
You say from the other side of the tin wall to my right I heard a small eat I heard some molly voices
It sounded like they were trying to get out of us, but I didn't think you know
But I didn't think it over for more than a second my MP5 was set on single shop mode and I put it to use firing four quick rounds right through the wall
I didn't hear the voices anymore
When I stopped shooting Randy and Gary looked at me as if surprised that a badly injured chopper pilot might actually be used
Fwant a firefight
They didn't speak but they moved around to the front of the heel again until they were out of sight
And now things start to build and you you know you detailed this in the book
You start here in more AK fire on top of the AK fire you also hear double taps
From Randy and Gary as they're engaged in these enemy fighters
Your firing fire through the wall you got your gun starts jamming from time to time
You actually emptied your first magazine
I mean get your other magazine in you fire in at these people that are approaching you approaching the helicopter
You talk about your weapon the thing was stressing me out and it fired just fine at the range
But it was clear the damn gun needed a good cleaning
I couldn't claim that I had had time for some basic that I hadn't had time for some basic maintenance
And I could hear the ghostly echoes of so many drill instructors keep your goddamn weapon clean
MP-fives are like
So reliable too. Yeah, I don't think it was it must have been jacked up for landing. I'm not sure
But pretty frustrating when you know that's the only thing you got
Could have been your magazines too. Yeah, sometimes if your magazines are messed up like they won't feed properly
You know I hadn't thought about that maybe just the impact itself
You know
Dislauged the bullets or something or messed up the spraying or who knows what MP-fives are so reliable
I've shot thousands and thousands and thousands and thousands of rounds and sometimes we would just purposely not clean them to see if they would ever jam
They didn't ever would jam a bet your weapon got jacked up
So you don't have to feel guilty about your drone instructors. Oh, I feel better now
Okay
Because it was just sitting there. It wasn't it wasn't in any kind of malnour anything. It just
Amazing getting fly out of the aircraft actually. I just had it sitting on the floor
You get some grenades go get a grenade thrown at you
You say it first I've been happy just to survive the crash then I accepted that I'd fight to the death
Then swell devolation at that promise of rescue now we were taking heavy fire
We'd almost been overrun and they were throwing goddamn grenades in here
I was dripping with sweat pain half paralyzed and out of ammo the stench spilled the stench of spilled jet fuel and gun smoke and rotting garbage
Or the oh would be my only escorts to my death
Randy and Gary were out there somewhere on the other side of the chopper desperately trying to hold off the engines
The burst of AK fire was starting to roll together like a thunder storm. I was alone. It was turning into the freaking alamo
Damn I'm hit
He was Gary's voice from the other side of the chopper a Somali bullet had found him yet
He wasn't so much as what he said but how he'd said it. He sounded almost irritated like this was just going to make things harder for him
It wasn't a scream or a plea just a statement of fact like someone who'd nicked himself with a vegetable knife
At that point I'm sure he realized how desperate our situation had become
No one was coming for us
Yeah, I mean because of your sort of awareness of the whole situation
You had some thought in your mind that hey look, I mean we crashed the the the Kazovak bird will be in here soon
The ground force will be someone will be okay. We just got to hold him off for a little bit
And that wasn't the reality the reality with everything that was going on you guys were on your own
Yeah, because this the search of risky bird already been shot out and we had asked for a tank actually
Because as you mentioned we're only two miles from the airfield
So our thought was if we have a tank it can get out there and and do extractions is just as well better than a helicopter
And it's one of the things that I always you know stress when I talk about this at the macro level
That was denied but at the secretary of defense level and you know first of all secretary defense should be making decisions like that
But it was it was based on political reasons
They didn't want to throw more assets into a place that you know they've been advertising you know was basically wrapping up and
Put basically hung us all out to dry
Yeah, just in case anyone's wondering a tank can go through that area with absolutely no factor whatsoever, right?
I mean, this is just small arms and RPGs that's no factor at all. Pounds right off. Yep
Only minutes before Randy and Gary jumped from a hovering helicopter rescue us
They had fought their way through a maze of paths and shanties driving off seemless seemingly countless
Somali gunmen they'd already done more than any two men could be expected to do they put their own lives on the line to try and help their fellow American soldiers
Gary Gordon died on the other side of that helicopter. I don't know exactly when and I don't know exactly how but I never saw her
him again
He died before I even learned his name
I will never forget him
Randy Schuukart came back around the cockpit
Striding toward me and showing little more than professional concern in his expression
They're throwing grenades in here. I told him
But he didn't seem to worry about that. He was focused on our critical shortage of ammo and he looked at my now uses mp5
Are the other weapons in the aircraft he asked
By crew chiefs keep their own sixteenths in between the seats
He went off to helicopter without a word climbed in and started digging around moments later
He returned carrying the longer m16 and a car 15 the short-billed submachine gun
I'd seen in Gary's hands
He handed me the smaller weapon and for some reason it felt much better in my grip than my own mp5
He held up a PRC 112 survival radio
What channels a fire net on?
It was odd he didn't even have to shout
There was gunfire echoing from the far side of the aircraft but in hesitant ones and two's channel bravo I replied
Randy made a call on the fire support net which gave him a direct line to little bird guns and fire support officer
A little bird was flying high over our position
A reaction forces and route came the return call from one of the helicopters the voice sounded familiar
I was sure it was one of the little bird pilots named Chris
Now that was encouraging all we had to do was hold out a little bit longer. We needed help, but it was on the way
We just got to keep them from overrunning us. We got to hang in there just a little bit more
Randy probably knew right then and there that a little while more would not be soon enough
He squinted out the radio stuff that into his combat harness
Hefted his weapon and moved off around the nose and the helicopter
He left without saying another word
I would never see him again
So that's
Master Sergeant Gordon Gary Gordon you know
Received a metal of honor
For his actions that day and also Sergeant first class sugar
And both those guys you know when you read their their citations
They requested
Multiple times to be able to go in to your position and
Try and help the situation that was on the ground
They got the Nied they got the Nied and finally they got permission to go in and do whatever they could
And you know I can you know we already talked about what things look like from the air and you can only imagine
Um
You know actually that these guys knew exactly what they were getting into they knew the situation they were going into
They knew the risks that they were taking
They knew that no one was gonna be able to get in there besides them
They had much better situational awareness than you did because they were up there watching it
And yet
They still Rogered up and went in there
It's the most selfless act I've ever
Certainly ever witnessed probably the most selfless I ever heard up
Because it's a little bit different
To be told to go in versus you know the way it went down
I mean as I understand and of course I'm on the ground so I don't I don't know I don't didn't hear this personally
But as I understand it you know, I mean garrison himself said no you're not going it
And then they finally got directly on the radio and said he looks or if you don't let us in these guys are gone
And after two or three different conversations like that he said all right put him in and
You know I
I just you know you think about if that was you
When I don't mean you but I just in general terms
Would you be that committed to your comrades to to go into that situation?
I don't think you never say you do what you wouldn't you know, but they did it and they did it without hesitation and I think they did
insist in on it for you know the rest of the mission if if he hadn't finally said yes and they're
Absolutely deserving of the melalar
We just did a a memorial dedication for for Gary Gordon this past fall actually in his own town of Lincoln main
And again, it's another example of when you see the family and you realize you know how what an impact losing
Someone like that has had on that old town actually and and his family you you understand what these sacrifices really mean
They're just
It's it's impossible to describe and
And I mean it when I say I wouldn't be here without those two guys. Let me know question and there's no doubt about that
Going back to the book here
You say suddenly it grew very very quiet up until this point
There had been quite a bit of gunfire
Ebing and flowing and volume some from us and from some from them, but for some reason it all stopped for a few moments
Maybe they've given up I told myself
I could hear my own lungs raspin at the air like sandpaper on plywood
Maybe the reaction forces coming in driving them away
I had no idea of this might be true, but my fantasy was encouraging my mind worked hard to suppress the rising panic
But my thoughts weren't remotely clear or focused. I couldn't move. I couldn't hide. I couldn't make myself invisible
My body jerked and clenched and I clenched my fist as a huge volume of gunfire
Shud suddenly shattered the silence
It came from the far side of the chopper and it rolled in like a hurricane of the worst sounds that Satan could conjure
Valleys of AK47 fire hammered at our helpless bird echoing off the cluster channies
The heavy rounds piercing the chopper steel skin and ricocheting everywhere
The only thing armored on that black hawk where the seats and I watched helpless and horrified as it was
Punctured over and over again and it buckled like a down elephant under a hail of poachrifier
Flying bullets plucked shorn metal and glass into the air and kicked up clots of doored all around me
It went on for maybe an entire minute a short span of time that's stretching to an agonizing eternity
I couldn't see anything through the Hulk of the smash chopper
So I can't say for sure, but Randy Schukegar was probably the only American left fighting over there alone against a countless number of enemies
He couldn't fight them all
There's only matter of time before he went down and when Randy finally fell the shooting stopped
The last valleys of gunfire echoed off the sparse trees
Then the most terrifying minutes of my entire life began. I doubt there's a more horrific thing one could experience
I still lie in bed at night and feel the flood of suffocating anxiety time seemed to stand absolutely still my skin crawled
And every vein in my body throbbed with terror
What did they really do to those Nigerians? I couldn't move. I could barely breathe
How much pain can a man endure before his mind shuts down and retreats into the sanctuary of unconsciousness?
I knew they were going to kill me. I just didn't know how death was on its way. I could hear it
They were a mob of hate filled men and women and I couldn't see them yet
But their voices grew louder and louder yelling and screaming and the sound that really made my blood run was the
Clatter of debris being thrown out of the way as they advanced. It was like
Some multi-limbed hydra stomping toward me thundering on the ground and furiously tossing away
Shards of metal and wood as a drew near
It was the sound of approaching death just overwhelmingly terrifying and I knew that as soon as they came across the nose of that helicopter and saw me
They were going to chop me to pieces that's what they had done to the Nigerians
That's what they did to everybody
We had heard I witnessed accounts of them playing soccer with the skulls of their enemies
The howling racket of the mob's rage grew louder and louder and I knew there was absolutely nothing
I could do to save myself
You had to be so 100% sure you were about to die. Yeah, I still remember the cloud
There was a cloud going over and I just looked up at it and I thought you know
Does it it's absolutely over?
You know, there's no scenario here that you could think of that ends up in survival
Yeah, they're let the thing that you're talking about with Nigerians that they had overrun a position and just
Just murdered and butcher these Nigerians. Yeah, they took no prisoners out of everything. I could think of no other course of action
I put the empty went weapon across my chest place my hands my open hands on top of it and stared up at the hazy blue sky
In seconds the semalees would come for me
Not an organized military enemy, but a mob of enraged civilians and militia with only one thing on their minds
Vengeance a few clouds drifted by overhead that will know helicopters in sight
I heard the rising victorious cries of the as the semalees swarmed around super six four
Bountings of hundreds of fists against her battered hide a rattle like swarm of feeding locus
I did not sob I did not pray no tears coursed down my cheeks for me and that one frozen moment in time
All that I could do was wait for their arrival
My Joey will never know his father
So surprisingly when they get to you
um well they they they grab and they start they start beating you and they start
Assulting you but you don't get killed immediately
You say I can't remember how many times they struck or club me
But it was many many times a snarling face bent in and a man ripped the green badge news from
Cored from around my neck that badge gave me access to task force Ranger compound and taped the back of it was my military
Identification my metal dog tags went with it and as soon as he saw the green badge in his hand
He stuck it in my face and shouted Ranger Ranger you die Somalia
His scream curled my blood, but it shocked me even more that this man could know so much about our security and our procedures
There was nothing on that green badge but a number
I wondered how many of these were now hanging around the next of our enemies
But I didn't wonder for long because two men began to work on my boots
They barely tore the laces open before bracing their feet in the dirt and twisting and pulling
I watched them tear my left boot off. I closed my eyes when they went for the right the pain of my broken
Femur shot up through my shattered spine like a high voltage
Electricution I looked up as a man raised something high above his head
For a second the son haloed around the object and then he swung it down on me like a club it smashed into my face breaking my right eye socket and cheekbone
For many years I have held my piece for the sake of the survivors the men who were killed
Not refuting the can't claim that I was struck with the butt of a rifle
But the truth is long overdue that object was not a rifle
It was soft and very heavy
It was the severed arms of one of my comrades
I did not cry out or try to defend myself my assailant was poised for another blow and obviously preparing to beat me to death
But I stared into his eyes with such hatred and defiance and discussed that he froze back to way and dropped his club
Someone fired a shot in the air it didn't exactly bring things under control
But it must have stilled the bloodless that was surging through the savage crowd
Someone threw a handful of dirt in my eyes and mouth the grip blinded me and I choked and sputtered grip from my throat
Someone else wrapped a filthy rag around my head
I felt many hands clutching out my legs and shoulders and then they hoisted me high up in the air my crushed vertebrae hard
Ground hard against each other as they stretched me out like a prisoner on the rack my broken femur cleaved into the back of my leg
The sharp bone puncturing right out through my skin I
Left my body the human mind has some defensive talents that only the dying or near dead can relay and mine took me to a place
High above my tortured form
I looked down on myself and the surging hard watching it all in perfect detail
The sea of howling triumpment in humanity and those thousands of hands passing me off like a bloody sacrifice to their unholy gods
For those brief moments pain was swept away and then so was I
So now you know I haven't read this at a long time yeah
Man
The um
This whole thing is
What's weird is about this as you think about it take a step back like the proximity of everything that's happening
The fact that the airfields of my all away the fact that you were
Flying around that whatever
Four thousand feet in complete safety two minutes later or 30 seconds later you're over the target two minutes later
Your shop down this is all just and it's all happening in this compressed time and compressed space and
And despite the fact that there's
Tanks nearby there's troops nearby
You're you end up completely by yourself
And that thought cross my mind I made I think I say it's somewhere in the book like
Is there not another American in this freaking city, you know? I mean, where is everybody but what I didn't realize is the chaos going out at the target
With the ground con boy the other shoot downs
Because all you know is your your fox hole right you don't you don't know the big picture and once I once I saw the big picture I realized yeah
Certainly had we got in the assets we asked for what it made a difference but they weren't there so we couldn't do anything
So at this point
You're like a ragdoff and they're just this mobs got you
Did you have any indication
At
That you were gonna survive this or was it just just just who when when did they start to rip me apart right?
I mean it's like what's next?
You know we've already been through two or three cycles here where
The end seemed imminent and and here we go again and then then it settles down when they throw me in this first location
Where we stop but you know the threat of death was always there. I mean they're just all amped up
Just you you've been there when when you're in the when you're in the fight you're adrenaline is so high and you're
You know from their perspective on the bad guy, you know, I'm the guy that's causing all this problem
Yeah, you're the bad guy that caused all the problems right every the you're the one guy that they've got to take it all out on exactly
Um, so they eventually get you they take you and
Put you in a closed space and some kind you can't really see what's going on because you know you've got the the
Whatever your eyes were blindfolded the the continual choruses Ranger Ranger you die Somalia right
Freaking nightmare
um now once you get once you sort of you're you're into this closed space
You kind of you know you say this in the book here those first few minutes of capture critical don't piss off your captors
So you went into like the sear mode
Instinctively right there at the crash site and you know it wasn't like
You know, I made this conscious decision, you know the game is different now. It's just sort of
It just happened natural you know it didn't became obvious the fight was over you know, I mean I got
There's nothing I can do and now I'm in their hands so I got a river to what they taught me
To survive a situation like this and most of it actually worked pretty well and surprising
And I shouldn't say surprise
How do you know you know it is surprised it's a little bit surprising because you hope it works
But you know when you're in sear school it works
Yeah, but we're here to do all the freaking crazed mob of Somalis
I mean I'm surprised you know I'm surprised I even reading it you know I just
I guess I keep referring back to the fact like you just knew you were gonna die because if I was in that situation
I'd be like I'm 100% there's no amgain out of this yeah not against a
1000 crazed mob
Like it's not you're not gonna get out of that. It's a freaking miracle
So you get into this room they they're
They're arguing about you they're yelling at each other like you can see there's some kind of
It seems to start to take some kind of shape right it starts to take some kind of shape like
They have another purpose for you
They end up
I mean I guess once you get away from the mob you must have felt a little bit better things did settle down
And one thing I didn't know is that I was actually taken by a rival clan and Mark Bowden is the one who did
Discovers this when he writes black-hawked out
Of course this is according to Somalis
I don't know if it's true or not but it makes sense if you think about the dynamics of those few
few hours
Because I did get moved a couple times and the characters did change so it's it's very likely I was in fact
You know basically stole and by a rival plan and then the go-shaded to get back to the hobby of getter clan
If it's not bizarre enough
You get chained up
But they change you in a such a way that you could you could let get your arm out so they weren't great at I guess
Chaining people I don't think they were great at very much actually
Fortunately no, yeah, I was able to squeeze out of it
Um
Another guy comes in eventually again. I'll look by the book. I'm fast-forwarding through a bunch of detail that's
That's fascinating the read and it gives a lot of the granular detail of what's going on eventually
You get a guy that comes in that's little less aggressive not as angry and offers you some water
Um, so you start to see a little bit of you know maybe there's a little bit of light a little bit of light at the end of the tunnel
This happened suddenly my captors outside were engaged in a battle. I could hear rounds being fired from the other side of the wall and yelling and chaos to
Groot to a fevered pitch bright flashes from their spinning gun barrels pierced through the ventilation holes above
My head and lit up myself like a lightning storm. I could feel the mighty the might of the US army approaching my door
It would all be over in a few minutes and for the very first time that day
I prayed I prayed to God to spare me and spare the lives of my comrades
I prayed for just a bit more of the mercy that it kept me alive until this moment
I'd been a casual cat Catholic before
But I would become a faithful servant forever if I could just have three more minutes of protection until I was on board a night stalker
Heelow and we were all flying off to freedom
Unfortunately, that was just another
Another firefight call on our guard. I think it was the ground convoy actually passing by close to me
That's the only thing I can come because I could hear what I think were 40 millimeter rounds actually flying through the air and then
You know pretty sizable explosions when those things hit and and it you know is marching toward me and then it gets a fever pitch and then
It starts to fade and and that's all that's the only thing I can come up with is that I was actually fairly close to where the ground
Convoy or a ground convoy I think you know because there was a couple of different efforts involved there and in getting to the target side on the ground
And just kind of demoralizing when it just starts to fade away in the distance and you've been shot where you got shot in the arm
I did yep, it was super super
Professional like all the shooting is gone on. I mean even when they were shooting up your bird that was on the ground like it's a miracle
You can get shot just by stray rounds
And that was a deflection actually it didn't hit me directly. We went off the floor and ended up in my left arm
Finally you meet this guy this guy comes in his name and he says my name is Mohammed gate
He offers you a smoke now what's the deal with Mohammed gate?
So he was probably the most sophisticated character that I dealt with he was basically trying to
convince me that you know the samallies were the victims and all this and then general indeed was a righteous man and
I think I put in there that he was telling me bedtime stories, you know
He was because if you go back in history you could see how that version of the story
From some perspectives could be believable. I mean
Where things go south on a deed is when he starts stealing all the food that's there from the relief organization
You know that's where he kind of loses my vote but before then you know leading the the overthrow of
What was described as a pretty
difficult prior government he's a hero and
This is what Mohammed gate is telling you about he's telling you what the history of samallia and now he's a great man
He led his people to freedom and we really got this all wrong. You know we're chasing the wrong guy right so
And again having gone to survival school and understanding that this is something you might encounter and probably will certainly in a long-term situation
I had my guard up you know, but the reality is and and I have no expert on captivity. There's people that spent
Longer and captivity and I did
But over time if you repeat a story often enough
It starts to creep into your your mind and and I think it gains credibility over time through repetition
So it's a long practice
Technique and I wasn't there long enough for them to work
But I'm sure they would have tried to do that because for them getting an American to say
Hey, this guy is really you know, we shouldn't be chasing him. This is this is all wrong
That's like gold. Yeah, that's worth a fleet of
Jet fighters to them, you know, so that's what they're after
Fast forward a little bit you end up you know you you you it gets dark you go to sleep you wake up
And and you start going into your your first kind of day
of captivity here
He says how are you Ranger?
I was not a Ranger, but I didn't bother correcting my form the recognizable symbol for okay with my fingers
Your friends he began and then pause like a surge in emerging from the operating room with bad news
You are the only one
I waited for the rest of it. I hope that he meant I was the only one captured
Gate came up with a packet cigarettes and I've offered me one
I heard the voice of one of my instructors from CIRSchool survival evasion resistors escape
You don't have to be subservient to your captors, but you do not but you do have to be cordial
politeness is a tactic not a surrender
No, thank you. We're the first words of my day and and he goes on to say
I'm sorry, but it's only you your friends are not living we thought maybe one alive under your helicopter at run away by night
But that is not true
You know he continued many Somali's very angry with the UN and Americans many many Somali's die in this fighting our women there the most angry
They are also the most cruel
Somali woman must take a revenge upon a person who kills her son or husband
She must take something from the guilty person. There's no trial. No jury. This is justice in our world
So again this guy's educate you on
On what's happening
And and I will say that I did feel that that was the case when the mob was
Taking place at the women where the one screaming allowed us and kind of breaking through and
You know taking a shot here and there and you know that's why I'm gonna sue when it's correct you say again fast-forwarding
At this point a new character entered the drama he was proceeded by four body guards and as he swept into the room
The other Somali's gate included retreated a bit and nearly bowed with respect he was middle aged war pencil thin mustache
And the wide fringe of hair surrounding his bald head looked freshly cut his colorful short sleeve shirt
Spotted pastel palm fronds and his base trousers were crisp and clean
Here remind me of a Miami Beach tourist. He seemed well educated and his manned English was delivered in soft tones
My name is Mr. Abdi is that right Abdi? Abdi. Abdi. My name is Mr. Abdi and yours
It was clear that this man held some kind of higher position well above the tactical lever level
It's time for me to give up one of the big four name ranks or service number and data birth
Durant Michael J Durant is there anything you need Mr. Durant?
I need a doctor. Yes, I can see that Abdi said the Somali surrounding him to be let seem to be less and very carefully
Trying to understand his nearly whispered English and is there anything else?
I need to be set free of course
He nodded as if expecting me to say that very thing
We will provide you with medical attention and I will make sure you are treated as well as possible
Yeah, I don't know where he was in the food chain, but it's pretty high up and he
You know the Somali's at this point
I don't know maybe this might be a little early for them to reach this conclusion
But but this didn't play well for them the things that they did with with with the bodies of
The comrades from crash I too that made it into the media and just the perception that you know the US in the end
Was really there to try to help them. I mean, you know put everything else aside put you know the specific of that battle to the side
The mission was to help the freaking Somali people and in return
They're killing us and dragon are remains through the streets. I mean that doesn't play well anywhere
So I think he realizes this and indeed realizes this and they got to do some damage control
So they're not gonna be perhaps as as hostile toward me as they might have otherwise because they don't want to be perceived
for seen as seen as the
The savages. I'll use that right you know that that in some cases they acted like I mean there's no question about it
one of the
One of the guest most critical points most painful points for you
Was when they show up with a video camera and you kind of talk about in the book, you know
your your knowledge and recollection of those type of situations occurring in Vietnam in the go for and I rack
And you kind of know it's common that you're gonna get you're gonna get this
propaganda opportunity for them
I'm gonna go to the book here. There was a man with a video camera on a shoulder and two more with tripods batteries and flood bites
Why you come to Somalia? Why you kill innocent?
Will you answer these questions and?
interrogating you in this methodology they go on and on
Questions began again
In those next few moments I would utter responses that would change the rest of my life
Why you come to Somalia?
I'm a soldier. I said in flat expression was tone. I do as I'm told
And again, that's kind of like a standard-seer answer. Hey, I'm just doing what I'm told
Why you kill innocent people? I glance at my interrogator then back at the camera so that at least someone out there could see I was responding
Against my will
innocent people being killed is not good. I said
Someone snapped his fingers. They turned the camera off and shut down the lights. It was over
They had what they wanted within minutes the room had been cleared of everyone and I slumped down on my back
I laid their reviewing every second of it in my mind and decided that I'd done all right
The only thing that video accomplished was to tell the world that the Somalia's had an American in captivity
I didn't second guess my decision to answer and I believe then as I do now it was the right thing to do
And that I remember watching this stuff when I hit the air. It's kind of freaking crazy that I'm sitting here talking to you right now actually
You know this is a nineteen ninety-three like I said I was coming back. I was back from my first sealed deployment and and
Was thinking to myself you know God look at what's going on
Was that was that you know that they're trying to get you to say the best they could get out of you is innocent being killed
People being killed is not good
That's like the best propaganda they could get out of you so I don't think they knew what I said
I don't think they completely understood it. I think they just thought okay. We got it you know
Because if you analyze it, I mean it's it's worth it. Yeah, and again the the credit there goes to the to the training
You know without the training. I don't know what I do
Probably reverse or the big four but you know it was proven in Vietnam
That doesn't work and you gotta have some guidelines to go by beyond that and
You know I was fortunate that I had gone to the training and new new kind of how to handle it
Yeah, you have a great sentence. I won't read it, but as they started interrogating you you started using you know
In like big words, you know multi-salebic words that they just could not understand it's it's a freaking classic sentence
That's a kind of thing that you learn in you know in sear school. Hey talk to them and a language that's elevated above what they actually know
so
You end up with that again. It's kind of crazy that I was sitting there watching that as a young the seal
You know clenched in my fist saying how can we how can I help? How will what could I do?
It had that effect on a lot of people and I think part of it is it came out of nowhere
I mean nobody thought anything like that was gonna happen this morning
I mean this was a relief operation and all of a sudden we're going from handing out bags of food to this
You know, I mean it just it was it had a shock and a lot of fact. I think and
You know and and everyone's reaction was pretty much the same you know we need to go in there and just
Devastate this place because this is just you can't treat Americans this way and and motivated a lot of people
Um you end up in another you get transported again. They take you to another spot
You said I looked around on my new digs now flooded the early daylight because this is it now several days in
The door was closed to fix the cheap lock like the one in my previous cell one of the window shutters
And open I could see another building not three feet away
There were no birds chirping and I could hear more street traffic. I concluded we had moved to a more densely populated part of the city
Now you got another guy that does in the scene now for Rimbee. I'm saying that right for Rimbee. What's the deal with this guy?
So he's got a big goofy guy actually
He was he was a sign the responsibility to make sure that I stayed alive basically that was his and that another clan didn't get me
And he had a few handful of guards, you know, and they
But he was kind of a goofy guy and initially he was very
Aggressive I would say but over time he became much more personable to the point where I think he'd a really struggle to
Fizzorders were to kill me. I really do you know on it again it goes back to just
The stuff you learn as a kid, you know you treat others the way you want to be treated you
You don't act like a jerk, you know that they're Muslim and when it was prior time I was respectful
I didn't you know I let them do what they need to do and and the and that goes both ways, you know
So it just it wasn't really a strategy necessarily as it was just
Kind of common sense combined with some of the training that I got and you know why would you want to make this guy
Do anything other than want to help you right? I mean there was a couple times that
Things happened to me physically and and I needed some help getting cleaned up and and he did it
I'm like man, I'm not sure how to do this for you, but I appreciate
You said the earned is combat
Yes, yeah, that sounds like a rough duty even I didn't want that. Yeah, it's for sure. What about doctor?
How do you say his name doctor caday?
Cadaya cadaya cadaya cadaya cadaya and what was it what was going on with doctor cadaya?
He had actually gone to school in the US you went to Med School in California I believe a USC
I think if I remember correctly and so he spoke decent English
But he had nothing left, you know this was a big fight people don't often
Realize how big the fight was from the Somali's perspective
I've heard numbers as high as 2,000 wooden on their side and in seven or 800 killed
So you know he's he's got limited resources to begin with and he's now dealt with all that and he doesn't come to see me for a couple of days
And I you know I describe it as a tackle box he had a he had a box of
Beta-dine gauze and a couple of instruments and that was in some aspirin. That's all he had
But he tried
And he's blunted my leg and
Unfortunately the fracture was so high
I mean, it's way up high. It's probably like two thirds up the femur
All he really accomplished was stabilizing my knee and my ankle so the only pivot point was the fracture
So when they moved me
That my leg is like this big thing that's and it's pivoting around the fracture site and I finally said man
You got to get this off and I finally convinced them to get it off
But you know he cleaned me up and he you know he did what he what he could and you never know
I mean could have saved my leg because you know open compound femur fracture and a nasty crap all like that is
The chance of infection is really high and I never got infected so
kind of amazing
The bring you some memories they start bringing you some water at this point you must be thinking like okay
I have a decent chant they're trying to take care of me. They got the doctor trying to give me guidance
um
Here we get another character rolls in and again
Get the book because you get to get the better introduction. I'm just kind of hitting the wave tops and these things
General it needs minister of internal affairs
He tells you your face has already been televised around the world
He continued almost with pride everyone knows that you are a prisoner in Shalaw
You will see your family again
Perhaps you would like a radio yes, I not a graciously a radio would be fantastic
So that your first recognition
Did you start to get a feeling for the fact that
Everybody knows what's going on here? Yeah at that point and at that point it becomes how long is this gonna last because with those injuries
After the fact they the doctors told me they thought I probably had 30 days to live
You know without proper care and
So it's a time it's a battle against time at that point, but it's certainly
Thought the much better than the first you know 24 hours for sure
You got a section in here that I think is just good to read because it's good lessons learned for life
You say it was my fourth day as a prisoner of war in Somalia
I knew I couldn't deal with captivity in terms of years
But I had to mentally prepare myself for a long haul
So as I started crumbling
Stared at this crumbling sea ceiling of hotel nowhere and listened to the furious buzzing of the black flies
I told myself that I would survive just one day at a time
I would not imagine my captivity as years of tortured waiting
Because if I really believe that I would probably die my mind could not accept being in prison for that long and those kind of things
Those kind of thoughts would break me like any major challenge in life
You have to take it in bits and pieces you don't try and tackle the whole thing at once
I remembered how I reacted at the crash site when it was overrun and I had focused on surviving for just five minutes and then making it through the next five
And so as day four dawned and I ventured further into the black tunnel of captivity
I needed a limited point of reference or that darkness would just overwhelm me
You just need to make it to tomorrow. I told myself if you wake up tomorrow
You'll figure out how to survive another tomorrow
Today you've got to figure out how to survive today
So that's the that's the mode you're going into
Good lesson for
Freaking life in general. It's any challenge any big challenge. It's just one at a time. That's all you can do
Eventually
Obdi shows up in again and you're gonna get a visit from the red cross
Red cross
And you get this radio that's working
Once you're on the radio you start hearing the reports and that was that had to be
That had to be crazy. It is it is because I mean like they're playing music
There's your quests for me because they found out that I had the radio
So now now guys in test force range are requesting songs and and data then requested
Whoops there it is or something
You have
Yeah, they're they're given a report before you get to the radio request
They're given reports of what's going on. This is sort of your first indication
You know you hear this report on BBC on Sunday October third round 4 p.m
Quick US quick reaction forced to 10 24 suspected I did militant members and a certain sees her operation
We believe several key militant members were among them
Three of the 24 detainees data wounds reserve received during the operation one detainees being treated
Key militant members we have detained were not among those who died wounded
As the and then he goes into this as the operation was in progress
Two US Army black-hawkella copies were lost due to ground fire during this time the troops evacuating the detainees came
Under fine return fire about 70 ranges surrounded one down helicopter dust they formed perimeter
To protect the wounded members of the crew while awaiting a medical evacuation and they two came under fire
The task force was organized consisting of two US Army infantry companies 24 Malaysian armored personnel carriers
Four Pakistani tanks two Pakistani armored personnel carriers a range of platoon in a company of armored humvies
The task force reached the down aircraft at two 30 Monday morning and evacuated the soldiers
I realized that I'd been in a furious battle that had been the furious battle I'd witnessed on my first night of captivity
Yes
No matter what injuries cliff and dawn had sustained I was certain now they'd been rescued
And then the report continues regrettably there were number of US casualties in these engagements as the Pentagon has already released five US soldiers have died
In addition to number of been wounded
It wasn't good news the major tone was cautious and I knew that his announcement of casualty figures was preliminary
I had no doubt that the numbers of our dead wounded would increase so
You're hearing all these reports of of what it unfolded and you're like you said earlier you're an eternal optimist
And to you you hear these reports and you're painting them in the best possible light right
Yeah
What about the black off flying overhead with plain acdc?
What was that all about?
Well
It is somewhat sensitive there was
There was a method to the madness it wasn't just to make me feel better
And I guess we'll leave it at that and then then Dan
Dan Jalato's real good friend of mine just got inducted in the army of each to all the fame actually just recently
Was flying not flying but recorded his voice and he's calling to be from the sky Mike we won't leave you behind
I and I just got to chill up my spine. I mean I still do just thinking about that moment because you know
You're not gonna be left behind. I mean you know that you know the unit you're with
There's the unit that's gonna get called upon to rescue people and situations like me and you know what they can do
So it's just a matter of time but to hear your friend calling you from the sky just
Incredibly powerful
um
You end up getting that red cross visit
This is like a how do you describe incredible angel of mercy is what you see this woman as
Suzanne Hofstetter
From the red cross and she's there to kind of check on you
You your first look she can tell looking your face she's like all your faces all I'm getting out she's like you're not getting released today
She won't give you that news upfront but she was there to check on you
um
And she actually gives you a chance to write a letter to your family
You say this I decided to keep it personally and mostly informative so that at least my family would worry less
This is what I wrote dear Lori and Joey
I know you must be worried about how I am doing they are treating me well the Somali doctor comes every day and cleans my injuries
The people are taking care of me are also treating me well they get whatever kind of food
I asked for but there's no pizza available unfortunately
I want nothing more in the world than to be with you and Joey again. I see his face and I pray this will all turn out okay
Please tell everyone else in the family that I hear their prayers and things will work out okay
Nothing else matters more to me than to see my family again. I think I will I really do
You stay positive and be strong and give Joey more hugs and kisses for his dad that misses him so
I broke my leg compound fracture right femur and injured my back in the crash
I think my nose is broken but it does not hurt
I have a superficial gunshot wound in my left arm the leg and back are the only real problems
But as I said the medical care has been very good. I hope to see you soon and I pray for the others who are missing Ray
Bill Tommy and anyone else I love you
I signed with my full signature Michael Durant a particular scribble that would assure anyone reading the letter that I had in fact written it
When I was done I was in tears to think that this document would soon be in the hands of my family was just overwhelming
And what's interesting is that uh
You know people like everyone got to see this letter the whole world right and including the intel people that were looking for the
Looking for the coded
Information that you had in there
Trying to figure out what you meant by a pizza because your favorite food was actually spaghetti
And there was this spaghetti factory in Mogadishu
So yeah, they went down a lot of rabbit holes. They took down every dominoes in the city
Oh
Those are some motivated friends man
Um and then you add so Suzanne the rod Red Cross girl ends up going back to
Task force and debriefing them and
She she gives them information of one of the information as you mentioned early was that you had a radio
And so now now these guys everyone knows that you're actually listening to the radio and they start
Freaking set send in songs to you and whatnot. Yeah, just uh
Again, you can't make this stuff. Yeah, it's crazy to even think about
You know you get thunder struck
You end up with Willie Nelson and meet low from these guys are just said you know they're dedicated to you
They play rooster by Allison change which again. I was when I was on my first deployment overseas
You know that Allison change album was so big and that song was obviously so big
Anybody in the military and here you are freaking actually living out the rooster's story oh yourself
They sent me a signed copy of the CD and note after the fact by no way. Yeah. Oh, that's epic
Um
My seventh day as prisoner of war I found religion
It's all often been said that there are no atheist and foxholes meaning that even a non-believer will begin to pray when faced with his own mortality
But I never been given but I'd never been a Catholic of convenience who only prayed when times were tough
Admittedly as a boy at a tenatured to regularly with my family while it was an adult and full-time army helicopter pilot
I'd allow that tradition to lapse yet my absence from the fuse hadn't broken my bond with the Lord at times
I would's off for my Sunday prayers from the cockpit or say a silent grace over an mRE between missions or
Ask a chaplain for a quick blessing as I ran to my healo
It didn't require the threat of death for me to recall the sacraments
So when I say I found religion I meant it literally so in this red box
Cron you got enough getting a box from the red cross. They got a razor and they got tooth brush and toothpaste and a writing tablet and pens
They a fresh roll a toilet paper
Which for those people that haven't been in the field or experience life without toilet paper. This is a big deal
Some playing cards and then you say the very last item was a US army Bible about the size of a small paper back
It's cover and binding in desert camouflage colors it was then that I realized some of these items have come directly from task force Ranger
Of course then you do the same thing that they did which you start thinking there's got to be some kind of a weapon here some kind of a radio
What I'm gonna this is how I'm gonna get out where's the file so I can file through some bars
Then you start taking notes inside you start taking notes inside the you know the blank spaces inside the Bible you still have that I do
I should have brought it
That's a comeback
And again we talk about how much of this story is crazy this part
My wife spoke to me at dawn
I had woken up and turned on the radio hoping to hear some more encouraging news and maybe some rock and roll to start the day off right my pains for my leg and back
Which didn't seem to keep me awake at night gathered force the minute I opened my eyes
I lay there with my eyes closed the radio tight to my ear hardly taking in the voice of AFN's female DJ until she started talking about me
On Friday the Red Cross delivered a letter to Rans wife in the United States
She chose to answer him on camera on CNN and hopes that her husband would hear her reply my eyes snapped open
And I blinked hard thinking I might still be asleep and dreaming, but no it was low-res vores
Her lights southern accent clear as a bell and I listened and as I listened the emotions flowed through my veins and
Futtered in my chest
Then she said I'm making the statement and hopes that it will reach my husband
I want them to know that Joey and I are doing well
I received your letter from the Red Cross mic
I was very happy to hear that you are okay and that you are being treated well
Clay and the rest of your family are taking great care of us everyone is praying for you
I know you can hear my prayers and the prayers of your brothers
I should take a breath my own breathing was quick and shallow my years burning as I listened with every poor
Everything with a new house is moving along fine. We'll be living in our dream home soon
I hope they're taking care of you and feeding you right. I'll have a big pizza waiting for you soon
Joey is waiting for you to get back before he starts walking
You want this father to see his first steps take care of yourself. Don't worry about us
We'll be fine and remember babe as you've always told me NSDQ night stalkers don't quit
Take care of yourself. I love you very much with all my heart
The DJ cut back when Lori was done but compared to my wife's voice her drone sounded cold and lifeless
Yeah, that's
Untie gone precedent
Yeah, and all in 11 days you know, that's the roller coaster of it
That was really why I decided right that book because blackrock down doesn't get into any of this
You know the blackrock down story ends basically when the battle ends and and this book really picks up at that point and keeps going so
That was that was sort of the catalyst because it's just bizarre and as you've implied
I mean there are a lot of great lessons in there and you know some I learned after the fact some I
So my applied but there's there's a ton in there
You start getting word that the former American ambassador to Somalia Robert Oakley had showed up to sort of start moving this thing forward
Oakley this is this is good to read Oakley made his position very clear there would be no deals
There would be no exchange of prisoners either a deed would release me immediately and unconditionally or rescue a
Temp would be made he frame the rest of his message as speculation rather than a threat
I imagine that such a raid will come soon or rather than later he said and with massive US forces gathering here each day
Fighter aircraft and tanks and so forth it will certainly be a tragedy
A large portion of your city will no doubt be destroyed and perhaps mr. Durant along with it
But the US is not going to sit idly by and let the clock tick any longer
We need about a thousand Robert Oakley's the guy was I mean he's legit
I met him I could tell you the way they reacted as soon as he came back on the scene
He just changed the whole dynamic they trusted him and he was they called him a shoot straighter
And that's you know this is the type of threat that
They understood right they believed they believed that he would back it up and
They worked
Fast forward a little bit
Mr. Minister Abdi I'm saying that wrong or no, I'm odd. I'm odd. I'm sorry
He comes in I have some good news for you mr. Durant he said I'm all ears mr. Minister
I said he smiled slightly at that but actually I was all nerve endings
I could feel them twitching under my skin
He elders the Somali national alliance have convened he folded his hands behind his back
They have made a decision. I did not say anything. I just watched him waiting you will go home tomorrow Mr. Durant
unconditionally
Next day
October 14th today is the day
That was the entry I wrote my Bible that morning so
That's it you find out that you're going home
It's
It's a little bit anti climactic because it's almost surprised
It surprised the guards when they when they found you
Yeah at the US cop. Yeah the US cop no one knew I was going
They just sort of showed up is like a Fed X delivery or something
Yeah, by the way, I fell out of the back of the truck when they first took off
Yeah, it's a little bit of the keystone cops here. Okay. But yeah, you know you talk about that
They vote you to van as they the you were too big to fit in the van and close the doors
So they just leave the doors open and then they start pulling away and you start flying up the back and they grab hold of you as you're falling
I mean, yeah, like you said it's keystone cops
Eventually you show up there at a task force ranger or at the compound and this this jack
This jag is looking at you and he looked stood there looked at me for a moment and shocked and then yelled holy mother of God
It's Mike Doront medic
Then all hell broke loose. There's an army field hospital right there at the UN compound
Medics and nurses and doctors charge across the tarmac as you and soldiers pulled me out of the van a gurney appeared and they set me on the litter
As faces
Crowd it around me everyone shouting a barking orders at once people were yelling for instruments and medical equipment
And it was like a scene out of ER as they rushed me toward the large green tents of the hospital
I looked around but for him be was no one in sight
He'd faded away into the crowd and I left his world much in the way I'd come into it carried a loft and engulfed the by a mob
Then the doctors the nurses
They go to work
You know you talked earlier about finding out this is when you find out about found out about cliff and dawn event
Obviously just freaking
Horrible then and you're finding out about everyone else. I mean
um
Just to kind of close out the book here and again. We've skimmed the wave tops of this and it's so many good
Incredible pointy points in it you say this just to just to kind of finish it out
There was a C141 waiting to take me to Germany
But between the landing pad and the jet all 400 men of task force rangered come out to form two long rows
A corridor of sunburn faces and desert uniforms someone handed me a borrowed maroon beret
And Dan Jolada and Stan Wood Mark Bergamo
I'm saying that Bergamo Bergamo and tray Williams lifted my litter and we walked toward the ramp of the waiting transport
Every man in the task force was holding some kind of a cup every cup had a shot of whiskey in it
The men spoke to me and murmurs as I passed they wish me well and offered me thumbs up when we reached the cargo ramp of the jet
My friends held me there so I could look out over this honor guard of my brothers this company of heroes
General Garrison stepped up onto the ramp he handed me a shot glass of whiskey
While he raised his own and all the men raised theirs to the ice blue African sky
To our fallen comrades his voice echoed
We shall never forget them
To our fallen comrades 400 said in unison
We downed our shots
As from a speaker somewhere came a recording of God bless America when the men joined into singing it their voices were like thunder and I could feel the earth tremble
They carried me on to the plane at last I was really going home soon. I would inhale the sweet sense of America
Soon I would be holding my son yet so much had happened
So many of the best pieces of my life had been torn away that I felt empty and hollow
As the cargo ramp closed I looked at my hands the only things I had left without coveted night stalker beret
And the Bible and
Something I'd always taken for granted before
My freedom
So
You you going to some of this in the book as well
What happens after that?
You know there's there's that's a whole another there's a whole another dynamic that takes place
You know you're getting back to America you got to get surgeries you're getting I mean you had to be one of the most popular human beings in the world at that point
Certainly amongst military personnel and government people and you know they
Some of them want to get their picture taken with you so they can post
Or whatever right about it or have it in the newspaper or whatever you do back in the 90s
I guess you don't post it stone tablets
Yeah
You enter into you know starting to get surgeries. I mean your femur must have been all jacked up at this point
Yeah, so it it actually the muscle shrink so it had a seven centimeter overlap from the shrinkage
So they had to put me in traction
Which they did in Germany and I actually flew from Germany to the US
Interaction and they didn't set the femur till I got back to four-cample so it had been
When it was all said and done close to a month before they actually set it
And
It's interesting that your bones get really sticky if they've been broken like that for a while so
They it actually doesn't create a significant problem. I mean you can wait that long to set it
I was that was shocked
But you know terms of recovery on that it's like nothing ever happened to them. I mean it's
You know any they kind of messed up sometimes it don't get the angle right or you know
It's rotated slightly but I guess my doctor had a pro tractor or something
Lineed it up and then you're goal at that point came became to get back in the seat get back and become
Become a fully qualified pilot again for for the night stockers. How long did that take?
It took a little over a year because you know the femurod stayed in for a full year and then they had to take it out
And then I had to prove after that that I should be able to get back in the car
But in the nice thing was
Things had started to change about that time frame where where the military recognized the investment
They have in soldiers sailors and Marines and
And unlike previous generations where I would have been just a you know thanks for your service and and set home
You know that's why you have it was the beginning of this thought process where
Limmer no limb you want to stay in will find a way to make it happen and and I was sort of
It was happening right in real time as so I got a lot of help and support in trying to stay in and get back on flight status and and you
Uh, Ren the Marine Corps marathon had you run it before?
I did I run it all thing for you. I've only done two I did one before one after one after and I ran faster after
So that was that's because they're gonna take it away my flight pay so I had to I had to get moving
But that was the you know my part of the battle is is
Convincing the army he looked I just ran 26 miles faster and I could before this all happened
Yeah, I should be a lot of fly and I got a waiver and I got back in the park and and did you like take a
What was your rank or what were you doing what did you take like a cartoon and go?
There what I was like six of us that went yeah, we
We all
kind of did it in honor of
You know the guys that couldn't be there with us because Cliff Cliff wall cut had run at the first time
I don't think Donovan ran it but anyway, we had all you know we weren't like elite runners or anything but we did
Recess together, so we kind of did it for them
So you end up just going back into full flight status at the 160th well, there was kind of a
Pan-shaked on that I really didn't need to be operational again when you know I'd back they never did anything to it
It's still deformed right so you know I can't I can't spend three hours in seat God it but the leadership
Recognized that it you know it's sort of a moral victory for all of us if I got back on flight status and and so I I basically became a staff officer
I still flew but not operational got it yeah
when
We when we fast forward a little bit
1999 the book Black Hawk down comes out like how does that impact your your life your world or was that
Was the was the biggest let's say
Flip on the publicity radar when you got home for me the biggest blip was when I got home
When we found out that Black Hawk down was being because it first came out as a series of articles in the Philadelphia and quiet
That's that was the original
Documentation that led to the book and you know the paper was okay because everybody is out
Okay, it's just the newspaper is gonna limit a distribution. It's not gonna get that much attention
But when it started to turn into a book scared to crap out of all of us actually because you know
You don't know what they're gonna do with it. They could just turn into a ridiculously stupid story or
Something highly critical or inaccurate or whatever but in the end it turns out okay so you know we were all
Now the grat I know something the ground guys don't like it a lot
You know I wasn't there on the ground. I can't speak to it. I don't know but
But from an era perspective it's accurate enough. Yeah, it's so
It's very difficult
You know I got a friend of mine that was in sag and Vietnam
His name is John Strecher Meyer and he has his own podcast that he does now called the sag cast and he just
Just has guys from sag on from Vietnam and
Those guys like two of those guys that were on the same mission will tell different different
Different circumstances of how they saw go down and they're not neither one of them's wrong
Right just saw it from a different perspective and or remembered a different way
So I can't even imagine trying to piece together the
Perspective of however many guys were on the ground in the battle that day and have it
Have every person be satisfied with what was said that's a very tall task and and you know what?
I'm not saying that's wrong. I'm saying
You know a reporter could be on the ground with you and me entering a building and
Could report what exactly what he saw and you might think it was the worst story ever
And I might think it's great and we would both be right because you know he could miss
So that's a very big challenge, but yeah, I mean obviously all of us in the special operations community read that book
You know when it came out and try to get the lessons earned and and definitely thought that it was
You know, I mean I thought it was a great book and
But again, I wasn't there. No, I think you did a good job
He put a lot into it. He did a lot of research and I think his intent was to tell it
That's truthfully as he could and I think he accomplished that and then and then the movie comes out
in
2001 December of 2001 the movie comes out so
I mean I think as far as combat movie goes combat movies go again
Is there some Hollywood stuff in there? They're sure is hell
Yeah, there's some stuff that's like not even close to accurate. Yes, there is but
That does a good job of conveying a lot of the chaos a lot of the mayhem a lot of the pressure that guys are under
So I don't know what you thought of that movie, but I think the same thing and in humanized some people
You know, it didn't portray everybody as the Avengers, you know that are invincible and you know
They're humans they make mistakes. They they they're there some that are just rock stars and others that
You know whether it's an experience or or what you know
Maybe aren't at that level of performance, but that's just reality so I think generally speaking
Yeah, I think most people are fairly happy with it
And it's it's the reason I wrote by book right I was about to ask you that so your book come came out in 2003 right so you must
To start writing that after those those Belkers was it to move your the book that made you
It was the movie. I mean, I want to see the movie and I I didn't go right away
Because I wasn't sure and what's this gonna feel like you know, I'm gonna watch my friends
Essentially die on screen
It actually seemed
Fake to me because the rafters so it didn't have the emotional impact that I thought it might have
For me and once it was over though because like I said that you know black-hawk down
The credits are rolling and I'm just basically waking up on my first day in captivity
So I thought there's never been a better time to kind of push this out than now and you know
Writing books in our world is a bit controversial to begin with right and and that's why I hadn't done it yet
But I thought look there's been a book. There's been a movie actually there are multiple books and it's all out there and
You know command you're the one to let it all out not me
So I'm just gonna tell my part of this story because if I don't tell it it's never gonna get told
It's I'm the only one that knows it and
So I felt good about doing it at that point in time, you know from an operational
Sensitivity perspective that you know stuff is all 10 years old. There's nothing there
But it's still you know it raises eyebrows here in there when you write a book and I understand
But I still feel to this day that it was the right thing to do
Yeah, it's impossible to write a book and trust me. I've written millennia
It's impossible right a book and and say well, you know
I'm doing this
I'm humble and I'm doing this because you're right no matter what you're writing a book
It's about you and so there's that there's that hypocrisy of doing that and I certainly like I had
You know my gut in knots because
Like you when I joined like you didn't talk about being in this hill teams for damn sure
One of one of my admiral friends helped me out get through that and you know
He said hey we're supposed to be quiet professionals
But that doesn't mean silent professionals and the stories and lessons there need to be carried on and you're doing a good job of that
And I was very thankful to hear that and I think that's accurate
What year did you what year did you or what time because you retired in 2001 right correct and
What month did you retire in 2001 February?
So
Okay, you know where I'm going with that so September 11th comes in your
You're in the bench and that's all I felt I mean really
But could could I have gone and flown to you know 18 hour combat infiltration and I've gannistered
I couldn't have done I'd have been asking them to drop me off somewhere in the mountains halfway through
You know because by back it just I can't sit that long not not in those seats so it was hard because I knew
You know the things that have gone on in this way as just you know you personally experience in the last 20 years
You can't even begin to describe it all. It's just unbelievable and
I did feel like I was I missed the boat because it's you know
It's our super bowl. I
Don't think people who don't serve in military really understand why you want to go do that stuff, but
It's it's it's you're super bowl. I mean this why it's you strive your whole career to get involved in that kind of stuff and
It was tough, but I also knew there was a lot of very capable guys that could do a better night could so
So once you retired you went in the corporate world for a bit
I did I went to work on a brand new helicopter for the army the army was buying a command sheet and it was pretty cool
I mean it's you know fast stealth the high tech
But it was a train wreck
You know we don't do very well with major acquisition
I'm sorry it's it's it's
When you think about you know
100 years ago we could do things with a slide rule or or whatever and today
We have all this technology and we can't keep anything on track. It's somewhat mind-boggling, but
That there's a whole list of reasons why that program was was in bad shape by the time I got there
But it was a good exposure to getting involved in in a government program office and how things
Work and most of them actually don't work
You know and as a taxpayer pretty frustrating to see what was being spent and what we were again for it. It's it's horrible
Yeah, and during that time you also wrote another book
Called just called the night stalker's right which is like the more of a historical account of the night stalkers right
It's just a select series of missions that were kind of from that same time frame and a little before and the whole idea there was to
Sort of articulate that
It's it's not just the same unit. It's the same guys. I mean there are people that have been there, you know
24 years and have been involved in all these real world ops and and
And again, I don't think the average person can even get their head around that that that you know those
Individuals contributed so much over such a long period of time. It's just unbelievable
And it did fairly well didn't nearly as well as in the company heroes did but
You know, I think it gave just some more insight into the DNA of this kind of unit, you know from an aviation perspective
It's essentially a seal-ty. I mean, it's you know
It's from a culture and commitment to mission and all that stuff
The mission's different but the personalities we don't live wait nearly as much
But we don't have we don't have toys any anywhere close to the biggest year toy. So it's expensive is your toys
Yeah, we always joke about the fact that like our budget is
So small compared to you know the aviation community because of freaking and a black-ock
What was a black-ock cost?
Well the special ops configured ones were probably in the 45 range
Yeah, so and that's not a thousand so I had an awesome
Huey pilot from Vietnam on and he was talking about you know those guys were just flying in the hot LZs like it wasn't like without a second thought
They were rolling in there and
He said something like well, you know you hear here. I was you know 18 years old and
Flying in and I got a
Whatever it was here got like a hundred thousand dollar aircraft. That's all mine
And I said you know and we started talking I said is that why it's more cautious with the black-ocks
Because there's so much more expensive
He goes yeah, I guess they must be more careful those things must cost like $250,000
I didn't I I knew it was more than that
But I said I think it's quite a bit more than that sir
He said oh really how much over a million I forget the conversation but it was funny, but yeah
For I mean a normal I ended up looking it up a normal black-ock not even a special spec off
Someone is like 20 million 24 million so yeah the prices went up a bit and and you actually
Once you got done, you know working with that first company you founded your own company
I did there was one other company in between but it just got me a little bit more experience in the corporate world than then
I was working for a publicly traded company and you know
I know you've worked with a lot of different companies, but in terms of culture the the biggest
Disconnect for me personally as a former special ops guy is a publicly traded company because it's
It's all about the profits. I mean it, you know there's good companies out there don't get me wrong
But when when you're reporting financials every single day
I mean we got to the point we're not doing a quarterly we're doing a really day
I'm
Are you people insane? I mean I can't do what I'm supposed to be doing for the company if all I'm doing is looking at the numbers
So I got very very disgusted by it and I thought okay, I've got enough experience. I can do this myself and I started pinnacle in 2008
And then what's that? What's the focus there?
So we're an aerospace company we we initially you know, I mean it was me and one other guy
So we started out with nothing other than a good idea and a powerpoint briefing and it's it's kind of hard
I mean you know a true start-up like that in the defense contracting world is very difficult
I mean most fail because it takes a long time to get contracts and if you have no past performance then
You know why is anyone gonna give you any work?
But we got some and we built on it built on it built on it and now today
I describe us as a we do everything in the aviation
Industry except build the aircraft so if you think about maintenance flight operations engineering logistics
technical publications
You know all of it we do all of that
For predominantly helicopters, but we do that tilt rotor for the for air force special operations command
We do some fixed wingwork for the air force we get some international contracts
So we've really gone way beyond what I originally
You know because you write the business plan and we're not gonna be in five years and and it's it's a fairy tale
Really for most cases especially a true start-up because you don't know if you're even gonna get any traction
So but we're so far beyond that now how big are you know in terms of employees so well a lot of workforce
It's close to 600 by the end of the year and you know again in
Five years what did I think we would have I don't know I probably put that have to go back and look at it
You know 25 people something like that so it's enough people where we got it we have a a human resources problem pretty much every day
That's the fun stuff yeah, so here you are how many how many years you end up doing in the army?
It's 22 so you did 22 years in the army you are a damn POW you if you flew the best
You know helicopters for the best unit in the world as far as aviation goes you end up retiring from that
You're working to civilian sector for a while you build this business up to a
significant business
I would think maybe you're you're saying yourself okay, maybe it's time to you know pump the brakes a little bit and take a little time for myself
But it turns out you're actually doing the exact opposite. I'm doing the exact opposite and
You know it's it was a tough decision because I was the runway I was lined up on as I
Describe it was
Retire our youngest is graduating high school this year
You know the company's done well. I can do whatever I want you know in the in the famous words
It was an Elon Musk who said I could be on the beach drinking my ties every day
But you know I want to make a difference so I
I decided to run for Senate and I think you're getting that sentiment from a lot of
Veterans because you know veterans have seen the sacrifice that people who served this nation have made and then you see things like the way
I've can't understand was thrown away and you see the way the southern borders be inhaled and you see this mandatory vaccine mandate and you know
You in particular where you hear speculation that seals are gonna have to pay for their tried-ins and turn them in
If they don't want to get the shot, I mean that's absolutely ridiculous and it just
You know you can sit there and complain about it or you can actually try to do something about it
And I thought I feel the same way today that I felt in 2008 when I was working for that publicly traded company
And I couldn't stand the way it was being run so that I could do this better myself
So I kind of have I feel that same way I can do this better than other people that are doing it
And I've met a lot of folks recently through trips to DC and you know initially when you look at them
Some of them sound intelligent and a lot of them are don't get me wrong
But if you meet them and you find out what's really behind the curtain
It's it's a little scary. We need we need more people with true life experience is not career politicians people who you know
This is not for me. I'm not going there to you know be in office for the rest of my life. I'm going there to try to make a difference and
I really don't think you can understand
military policy
In business policy unless you've actually done it and a lot of these people have not done it
I mean they they've studied it or maybe they think they know it but but they really don't
I mean you look at some of the dialogue going on right now about Ukraine, you know some
Our congressman said yesterday, you know, we would use nuclear weapons
These people don't know what they're talking about you know and you got to have somebody that
Can maybe apply the voice of reason now now you know Alabama is a very red state so in our state
It's all about win in the primary and
You know that's in me this this coming year and if that happens it's pretty much a guarantee you win the general and then
Start serving in February of 23
What was the how how did this start off in your brain?
But also how did start off?
What do you do do you?
Do you call 1-800?
I want to run for senate like how does that work?
Can that some people do and it doesn't go very well, you know
But no I was asked to consider and the reason I was asked to consider it is because I do have that real world experience
And I have it has to be dusted off a little bit but I have name recognition
I mean there's a lot of veterans in Alabama
There's a lot of people that remember this story there's a huge aviation presence
And having that
Resume plus the business resume
Is it real it's very very appealing to the average Alabama voter and
The fact that you know, I'm not a career politician people are looking for our different answer
I mean you look at Glen yonken you know big part of why he won is
He's he's a fresh face with a new idea and real world experience
It's the same thing Tommy Tuberville our current senator who I would serve with
Coach of Auburn football, you know, it's the same thing
Never been above addition before I think initially when he announced people were like
Coach T I mean but I've met with him. He's doing an awesome job
He really works hard to understand the process and he cares about the state, you know
That's what it should be all about it shouldn't be about trying to further your own political career
It should be I'm here to serve the people of Alabama and the nation because as a senator
There's a lot there. I mean you know the things that you vote on
Matter across the board and I think we got to have people there that have you know
Integrity and you know there for the right reasons and that's why I'm doing but
I could be nuts. I mean it's not fun
Well, yeah, I definitely think you're not so you know
When you're talking about the meeting these politicians for some of them that are up there
We did a
Probably too long of a podcast. I did a series of like five or six podcasts about this book that I've read called
The Psychology of Military and Complidence and it's written by a guy that was a
Psychologist but he was also a guy that served in World War II the book was published in maybe
For five or something like this but one of the key points in it that it talks about is
One of the reasons why and he he does the same thing that you just did
Which is not he's not talking about everybody he points that out over and over again in the book
There's plenty of military personnel that are awesome that are great leaders. They're outstanding
But there are also people that are in the military that are horrible leaders and they're toxic leaders and
One of the key components that he talks about is the of authoritarian mindset
So what the problem is with the military is it gonna attract people if I'm a if I have an authoritarian mindset
Up foritarian psychology. I want people to listen to me and I want things to be an order
So what better way to to make that happen than to join the military becoming officer people have to listen to me
And things will be an order and
And then inside the military as we know if I never go into combat and all I have to do is
Keep the keep the the the the uniform squared away and keep my area clean
I'm gonna get promoted because I'm gonna run things like an authoritarian now
I'm horrible in combat because I can't control everything and it drives me crazy and I freak out
But it attracts that kind of person and then you know
Just as you were talking about being in the government and being in a being in a position where you're in control of things
It can unfortunately attract the same kind of deranged of
Foritarians that want to go in there and control everything and so I think that's coming
I think we're seeing a lot of that right now a lot of the government that is looking around going oh wait
This is an opportunity for for us for me to become even more authoritarian about what's happening in the world
I can control more we can mandate things and
And I think you're in a position where I think a lot of people are starting to push back against that and want to
Go through life and
Have freedom individual freedom which is the thing that makes this country great in the first place
Well, how did your wife feel about it so she is obviously the first person I spoke to that must have been a fun
conversation
You know she's not a very public person and and I thought she's gonna shoot me down right there. I mean I
I was shocked at her reaction and she said
You know if you think you can make a difference. I support you all the way and
It kind of reminded me of the conversation about starting the business. I brought the kids in because they were still young and you know
You're giving up your job. You have put your house up for collateral
I mean the bank doesn't write you a check and say good luck, you know and so I brought the kids and I said
I'm gonna go do this now you gotta understand if this fails
We're gonna be living in a box and they still remember they remember they're living in a box conversation
So you know I think as long as you
Understand the risks you understand
You know when when it gets near the end the negative ads are gonna come
I mean people are gonna bash you on social media
You can't avoid it. I mean doesn't matter who you are
It's someone is gonna be against you and unfortunately there's lots of
ways that people can communicate that today and
I had my first hate mail and the
And the letters to the editor this weekend in our hometown newspaper and I even read it and and my campaign team said
That's a victory. He's they said you're gonna eat free publicity
You know you're never gonna get everyone to say that they align with you, but you know
It doesn't bother you don't honestly doesn't bother me
But I someone asked me what's the biggest difference and I said you know in the world a week come from which is always gonna be me
I will never not be that person
You can trust everybody on your team. I mean
There's a players and there's a player but you still trust them. They're not gonna turn on you
In this world that I'm getting into you can't trust anyone. I mean even I mean my own team tells me
Don't trust anyone if you have a conversation with somebody
Assume they're gonna go and stab you in the back with whether information you provide
So it's a very different world you know your guards up all the time
But you know, I mean somebody's got to do it and
There's a lot less qualified people than me
That have been successful
Man so for people to support you in this
I know I looked at your you got Mike Durant dot com that's that's where people can go they can learn more about you
You also are on all the various social media
Which were you on social media before?
LinkedIn okay, if you call if I social media could have fun
You're gonna have fun. I mean people are
You know, I
This is the world right this is the world right now and people are people are crazy and
They're not even crazy. They're just gonna say things to you to see if they can get you to get you to respond one time or get some
I wrote tweet or whatever
So I look forward to watching you navigate this
Thank you
You're on Twitter Mike Durant AL so Alabama Mike Durant AL Instagram same thing Mike Durant AL
Facebook Mike Durant AL you have a year on YouTube channel
Which is Mike Durant for Senate where people can learn more about you as you as you
Go forward in this crazy place which again
I think at some point you're at least gonna think to yourself maybe the
Join an Elon Musk with my ties on the beach would have been a better call. Yeah, I'm sure there will be several moments like that for sure
But but to your point
Listen this this country you know again we've we're now of a son we're talking about
We're talking about
Fighting Russia for in Ukraine that's that's that's discussions that are happening right now
We've got the problems at the border
We've got problems with our our unrest in the country there's so many issues that
I just for you to be stepping up to this way. Thank you. Thank you for stepping up. I know it's a terrible drag and
But somebody's got to do it so there's a there's a man in the arena speech in my book which from the moment I first read it
To me
Really defines why I'm doing it. You know, I don't want and again it goes back to 2008
Why I started the business I didn't want to sit on my porch at
75 thinking what if you know
You got to you got to take the leap you got to you know take the chance right at these edge of what you're comfortable with and
I'm you know succeed or fail. I'm not gonna have any regrets. Mm-hmm. Yep. Awesome
Echo Charles. Yes
Do you have any questions. Oh, yeah, you mentioned your back a few times
Like what how's it now where where on your back was it jammed up so it's L
Three I think it is and it's anyway down the kind of like a third of the way up
It's kind of a miracle actually the only thing I can't do and and because don't bust me on this is I can't pull weeds at the house
Something about my back
But pretty much anything else you know, I stay active because I'm a big believer that you got to keep the juices flowing as soon as you stop
First of all I'm 60 so you know things things started to deteriorate pretty fast that when you when you reach that point in life
So I still I run I live weights I was playing hockey until just recently and you know
Stay an active
Got into climate some mountains this year I can think I climb five four teenagers in Colorado this summer
So you know just you just got to stay moving and
Staying strong is the key to a back issue no question, but you know
I already know and then I'll get it I get some kind of muscled problem it'll lock up and you know last three or four days
But you know I try not to overdo it and and so far
It's hanging in there. Yeah, that's so crazy because there are people who have not broke their back
Who will have major back problems in the 60 year 50 whatever?
Yeah, same saying it's crazy got to stay on the path got to in all forms
My look we covered you know again the wave tops of your book the wave tops are your life
Is there anything else any other closing thoughts?
Well, first of all very much enjoyed reading
Your book I agree with it. I mean and it's funny because I think I mentioned when I first walked into building today
Some of the some of the lessons learned in there. I applied this morning. You know because we did a management meeting
Over the phone over teams we do a a bi-weekly
Where we just get everybody at the speed on what's going on and and you know is all about just simplifying the message
You know because if you think about it from a
Worker at the point of the spear is perspective that really helps
You know that that's where the message needs to resonate and if I might understand it or the legal guy may understand it
But that guy or gal out there like what they all are they talking about you know
So I and I think because of my background that's just natural for me
I mean I don't a blue collar guy we we lived in a trailer, you know
I mean my parents both working class people I left home with $70
You know, I was a private I've mopped the latrine
You know I I don't have to pretend to understand that perspective. I've lived it
So I think that really helps and I don't know how you could get everyone to experience that because I think it's invaluable and
There's been some great leaders who never experienced that but I think we're often not having that
Humbling sort of meager beginning really really gives you a better perspective on how to
How to lead people because because as you say it's all about trust
It's all about respect
It's all about you know keeping it simple all those things that you know if you've come up from that
part of the the ecosystem
Maybe come natural to you by the way
Doug Brown you reminded me when you said about your commander who told you about
You know
Where the quiet professionals not the sound professionals he is and he may he probably doesn't remember that and and
And wouldn't likely deny it but I talked to him about writing this book and
He said no one's gonna give you our time right now, but you know at that at that point
The movie's out books out. I'm out and retired
You know and and so if he gave me the endorsement that was good
You're gonna get it because at that point he's forced our general right yeah
I mean, I've read so many books on this podcast from
From some private soldier that fought in
Korea from a guy that served in Vietnam
It just and and there's so many lessons to learn and not only is it lessons to learn
But it's also capturing the history and the and the stories of the service and sacrifice of all these people
So I think that's probably where general Brown was coming from you know looking at you thinking about what you've been through me now
We don't have we don't have any other buddy that we don't have anyone else that can tell that story
They don't exist so for you to for you
Put that word out. I'm sure general Brown was thinking look it's not just
Not just people won't say anything in 30 years in 40 years people are gonna be so thankful that you wrote that book because now
We have a document that's that can explain everything that you learned and
Explain the incredible sacrifices of of the the troops that served alongside with you and and fought and sacrificed their lives for their team and I think
That's not only is it that that needs to be done and it was a healing process
I don't think I touched on that earlier, but when it was over it it felt like I
Just did something I was supposed to do you know and it felt like just getting it all out
Was was part of a recovery which which I don't think you ever fully recover from this
I mean it depends on how you define recover, but you know to think that emotionally
I'm not affected at all by what happened there is a false I mean I you just can't help it every now and then
There's a wave that comes over that's grief, you know
I mean these are these are your family and they're gone. Yeah, you know
I had a I'm the same way you know losing my guys and it's just horrible and you know
Sometimes I think well
How long is that last for and I had a guy on the podcast named Colonel Tom Fife who was he fought in
World War II Korea and Vietnam and he received a purple heart in World War II Korea and Vietnam
And we were on the podcast we talked about World War II we talked about Korea
We talked about Vietnam and he was a baton commander in Vietnam, you know, infantry batton commander
And we were talking about their optimal and operations that what they were doing and and I asked him about
You know the casualties that he took in his battalion and as I asked him that
I saw he almost immediately started getting choked up and emotional and
That's when I realized to myself I thought to myself. Oh, I'm always gonna feel like this
It's always gonna be there so like you said I
You know, I don't think you don't get over it and probably not healthy to get over it
Like how can you forget your friends? It's never gonna happen and I do think that writing about these things has helped me a ton and talking about them has helped me a ton
The the the act of writing when you write something you
De facto detach from it, you know, you you read the words that you wrote and it you get a little separation
You can kind of process it more so I think the writing is therapeutic and does help move people forward and
Helps you process what you've been through and in a in the most positive way that I can think of
Because then other people get to see and get to read and hear and understand more clearly
What you've been through and also the sacrifices that were made. Yeah, and you know
It's like some books are critical of the military or whatever
There's nothing there's not a bad thing in there about but and yeah, there's some bad things it happened by the way
Some of that language is kind of flowery
And that is Stephen, okay. That is not me none of those flowery where it's gay
Yeah, it's good to have you know somebody that helped you out write it and kind of
Clare or fry some stuff and add some words that you know you didn't learn when you were living in a trailer new hamper
Yeah, I don't know my mother would probably cringe if she knew I said we've lived in a trailer
Was this short period of time?
You know, we were just
And I didn't know the difference. I mean, I was a happy kid. Everybody lives in a trail
So it was there my upbringing was fantastic. I really had a great family to great part of the country to grow up in
Winter sports, you know
It's a I miss a lot that's so that's where the hockey comes from I started playing hockey when I was a kid
Yeah, people don't understand you drive through Massachusetts and there's hockey rings all over play stuff there
They're playing their hockey. That's for sure
Well
Like I said thank you thank you so much for coming on. Thank you for for
Sharing your stories sharing your lessons on it's
Thank you for what you're doing right now to to step up into the arena
That's a
To be a US senator that's a whole new battle a whole new different type of battle and thank you for doing it and most important
Thank you for your service and your sacrifice
For our great nation and finally and most important that we honor and salute the sacrifices of the brave men
Who fought alongside you and who made the ultimate sacrifice for their brothers and for our country
Thanks for joining us and it's been my pleasure and
With that Mike Durant has left the building
so
pretty
Pretty all kinds of crazyness going on there crazy
For me as I sat there and was looking at him
You know and I was always talking about
The the video that came out of him and that was everywhere and I was in the seal teams in special
Operations was hearing all the rumors and of everything that was going on and here I was watching him on TV
Was that 28 years ago and
Now we're sitting here talking to each other. He lived
He went on with his career
He lived he did everything that he did and now he's sitting in this room talking
Sharon history with us. That was
Yeah, I remember feeling that
Not quite all that but feeling that with um
Bill Reader and
He was like when you know you go through all this experience and you're like look at this guy
He's just sitting here right now just talking to me and that's what he went through and here he is
There he is right there, you know, but you're is even more because you were you remember that
Actually, I mean you were watching it. That's crazy. It is very crazy and then when you have all those names that overlap
You know whether it's general brown
Like that's crazy right general brown was his battalion commander who's talking to him on the radio
I
Was an admiral's aid sitting on an aircraft with general brown flying to some other country
Going into meetings in the Pentagon with general brown is the same guy. Yeah
Is the same guy Adam Curtis who was the guy that got rolled up in Panama with his wife
I worked for that guy. He was my task unit commander when I was an E5 in the single teams
The same procurement that's in that book
That caused the invasion of Panama to take place kind of yeah one of the one of the primary causes
Yeah, and kind of goes back to something that you said before a while ago where it's like those aren't
Can just characters in a story yeah, all right a movie or something. Yeah, and I said that early on in this podcast
Is it hey remember that when we're reading this book these people
These characters that you hear they're not characters. They're people and I guess you're right that's such a
Absolute clear connection to the fact that they're not just characters
There are people yeah
But also have mom for sure and
Man
What did it what a what a crazy battle the incredible incredible
incredible battle
Incredible sacrifices made on that day and
Yeah, makes us think of you know how good we have it you know like like Mike Durant pointed out you know
You'd meet the families and realize
Well if it wasn't for them he wouldn't be here. Yeah
So I think that's probably one of the things that drives him to continue to
But want to serve so
We got to continue we all have to continue continue to serve in whatever way possible
Also, I'll tell you what's impressive he's in good shape. Yeah, good shape. Yeah, even the like look at them
Yeah, like all okay this is 60 doing it. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, so I think that's a good
Probably a good thing for us all to think about if you want to maintain some sort of capability
Probably a good idea. It's true very true and as we mentioned before where hey have you ever broke your back?
No, I have not ever broke your love bar. Yeah, spine haven't crashed in a freaking in a in a black-all helicopter in an
Out-of-control black-hawk helicopter spinning to the earth
Compressing my spine breaking my femur having been dragged around by a mob of angry some always and beaten right after by the way, but right after that
You know, so you haven't
That has to be okay me neither as you you probably know me neither
But he still runs marijuana. Have you ever ran a marathon? I have not me neither no
I'm not my granddad. I'm like their aunt did yeah for sure. Oh climb to what do you say five four teenagers this
Past summer what does that mean sixty fourteen thousand foot peaks? Oh, that's tall. Oh
That's the slang that's how you say it for 14 years. You say the gear
Let me send yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, I've never climbed five or any
Four teenagers for that matter and I haven't broken my back. So what I'm saying is the point there is there that's a that's saying a lot
Or it's putting things into perspective
Same saying we're like you can break your back and break your femur compound fracture by the way
Then dragged then captive with no real medical attention for eleven days and
Then after that go still lift still climb five four teenagers still run marathons
It's kind of like okay now it kind of puts into perspective this might be a choice if we're not kind of on the path you know
So yeah, we got to stand that path we want to choose the right path choose the right path
Yes, sir. What do you got how how can you help us choose the right path? We want to be strong
One be capable he made a good point. He was like the thing about your back is strength is very important
Yeah, right and that that's true like if you have a strong back it like effects everything just like if you
Leave talks about that like life has a bad back if he deadlifts
Yeah, he gets better if he doesn't it gets hurt yeah, and even that is a crazy weird little dichotomy too
Right because if you have a bad back and you start dead lifting all crazy heavy
That's that's that's bad. You gotta be squared away
I can't be an ego lifter
That's sure that's someone was just learned reason yeah, that's that can be dating us too for sure
And the last one be capable right because how much you're lifting or not lifting one be capable
You can be capable of lifting heavy things kind of got exercise that can stop and be capable of running marathons or
14ers or whatever the case maybe
Get exercise that can stuff but when you exercise yes, it is rough. He can be rough
So we might need supplementation, but don't worry
Jocquette supplementation jocquette. Man's just landed. I'm just a little danger. I'm just staying in the facts
I'm just saying you just press record, but I'm gonna say thanks, Jocco. Thank you. That was freaking poetic
I can't take credit continuity of that whole just the way it landed in there, you know
Well, thanks thus storm whatever you're putting it down right target every time yes, sir
But I can't take credit. I'm just staying in the facts. Okay
Right, what do we got for supplements so for well let's start with the energy drinks. Okay, so not typical energy drinks not traditional energy drinks not
Old old
Unreliable poisonous
And what they used to give you and you had a headache back in the day?
More a fiend or cocaine
Yeah, cocaine right so yeah, yeah, like cocaine. Yeah, maybe cocaine was for the answer cocaine was for that
More a fiend was this morphing was for that. That's what they do like I I don't feel great today
Cool, but you want more fiend right on that's that was a normal thing
All by the way and smoke these these things over here suck on this smoke into your lungs because I know how you do
They were legitimately doing that. We're gonna think even you like vodka or something too for salt
So they would tell pregnant women hey, you know, you need to relax go have a couple
They did that my mom yeah my mom told me she was drinking gin and tonics like a bug a boss, you know
When you was pregnant with me, which explains a lot
Explain to little yeah, you got him saying yeah, but when I do that anymore
Right what I but what I'm saying is you wouldn't have known back in the jury that when the doctor
prescribed you
cocaine
Yeah for your headache you wouldn't be suspect until you were freaking crackhead
Right so it's a thing with right now with the
Traditional poisonous energy drinks that a lot of people don't even know that their poisonous yet. Yeah, they're sitting there drinking them
They think they're actually good to go they think that that's just a little bit of cocaine and they're gonna be fine
It's not it's a lot of bit of cocaine and it's addictive and it's killing you
So we're not down with that what we are down with this monk fruit
Well, we are down with this pasteurization what we are down with is
95 milligrams of clean caffeine that's what we're down with we actually made something that's healthy for you
Yeah, my kids drink it my own children drink it. Yeah, so if you want some
We get some discipline go. That's a new paradigm of energy drinks
Well, you know stuff that's good for you. Good for your brain too. There's some new tropics in there
You got to keep that in mind when you're drinking this stuff. Maybe that's where you get your little landings from you get the whole story
You know figured out boom there you go. That's the discipline go kicking in it. It's very possible bringing it on home. Yes, not less
Yes
Sometimes when we're lifting running marathons climbing
14ers five or whatever the case may be sometimes joints get jammed up
But
We got some supplements for that as well join work for super-crile oil get on the the the subscription
Actually to all these things, but especially for these because that's not the that's not the fun one like the monk
Which I'll get into in a little bit
It about a 30 40 minutes from now. Yes, sir. Yes, sir. Oh, but it's true
Even me a grown man. I have my routine very effective
But everyone's a while I'll forget that's the the cruel oil and the joint work for not recently
But it has happened
But you have you get on the subscription
It'll that'll help but nonetheless you want to look after your joints on this thing don't neglect them
It's easy to neglect if you let it let it happen but don't neglect a
immunity look out for that to 100% vitamin D3 take that every day. I take it every day
I take one the morning one at night by the way
Cold war that's there got your back that's like air support right?
It's fine overhead it can lay down some some thunder if needed
So you go on that you get the cold war going and then you're just gonna say something about milk milk all day the milk train
So I've yet
To try the banana one. Oh, I have it standing by. Oh, it's good, but tell see you proved. Oh, yeah
Oh, yeah big time, but now you're getting the full on banana cream scenario. Well
Creamy banana cream right because that's just said that the frozen bread banana makes it more creamy
same as what she said yeah
So yeah, milk protein
additional protein in the form of a dessert
That one a little bit harder to forget
Something because it's kind of your mind a lot more because I think about because sometimes you're getting done with a
28 ounce Tomahawk steak
This is about as good as the world gets right you eat a 28 ounce Tomahawk steak by the way
I got some sitting in my freezer right now they're getting ready to get crushed
But I will finish a 28 ounce Tomahawk steak. I will be so
satisfied
Mentally
Physically
Spiritualy spiritually. I guess what I still want a little more kid or a little kid
And then it makes complete sense. It makes complete sense. So yeah, so like you're gonna be like it's gonna be on your mind way more and
Underway more circumstances as opposed to like you never like okay, so a lot of times you can be like oh, yeah
I'm really in the mood for a little more kidder or let's face it big one
Or triple one whatever the case may be you will you will find yourself in the mood for that from time to time pretty often actually
Yeah, but you don't really find yourself you know, I'm in the mood for to take some krill oil
Yeah, it's like it doesn't work even though the benefit to the krill oil is or or very significant
Same same yeah, I'm just saying keep these things in mind yep get yourself some milk
That way you can have dessert and feel good about it juggle white tea by the way it's winter time and some places including here
That means you transition into that warm tea in the morning and a little bit of juggle white tea
You see that you see that deadlift kick it back up to 8000 you know if you've been off the path for a little bit on the tea
Yeah, just just just check yourself
You can get the drinks at wall-walk you can get all the items at vitamin shop and you can order any of it all of it
From juggle fuel dot com and if you subscribe shipping's free
Oh there you go, yeah, sir. Also origin USA
dot com
Or just origin USA in general so American made goods products we got jeans we got boots we got
wallets belts
pants other work pants hoodies you know heavy hoodies heavy hoodies like for real heavy for real heavy not whole why
No, no, yeah a little bit different main heavy yes, there Minnesota heavy yeah northern Michigan heavy
Montana heavy have talking heavy heavy hoodies that are suitable for all these cold scenarios
so origin USA
dot com and and here's the deal
We could just leave it at that right be like cool. Yeah, that's the really high quality products
We could leave it at that yeah, go get some we can't because we gotta tell you something else they're made in America
they're made in America by American human beings with
with
materials that were also made in America and born in America and grown in America
So when you buy something from origin you're not just getting a shirt you're actually rebuilding America
Yeah, you're rebuilding our manufacturing you're boosting our economy you're putting people to work
So look do we want to have
collateral benefits when we buy something yeah
Well, what if the collateral benefit is your hurting America's economy?
That's not good. What if the collateral
benefit is that you're
Keeping a weagre in China in a slave labor camp is that good? No, that's not good. It's not good. All's I'm saying is you should shop at origin USA dot com for freedom
for the cause of freedom around the world
It's true like you ever you ever known someone who really doesn't take pride in their work
Yeah
You ever met someone who does take pride in nowhere. Yes, I had okay, so boom
It's night and day as far as the contrast goes yeah at origin like everyone everybody from Pete
All the way across the spectrum to
Everyone else
They're taking pride in that work trust me. I've been there. I've seen it with my own eyes. Sure
Speaking of taking a pride in our work
Chocolate store it's called chocolate store it's a good store there
Chocolate store dot com is breaking it you discipline equals freedom short-tatt hoodies
Some rashguards on there some shorts on there. I know it's season the Christmas season little cooler not everywhere though. Yeah
Yeah, I'm seeing how here in California. We're still wearing shorts. I'm something we were in shorts right now
When people see me wear pants
They're always well when like my normal people yeah my local friends see me wear pants. They're like oh
I'll dress up. But I remember when my the youngest daughter like the first time she saw me
Parallel with a pair of jeans on yeah
She was like all like why are you all dressed up? Yeah, that's how it feels so
True so yeah again you can get some good stuff you want to represent on this path
So the shirts speaking of shirts on on there. We have something called the shirt locker
Good name by the way
Chocolate proof name anyway. This is a new shirt. I came from a trooper by the way. Yeah, and you spell it s
H U R T locker yep, but unlike the hurt locker. This is good stuff
Good stuff, but it's a smile on your face. Yeah, I'm new shirt every month creative designs good ones
This next one you might you might recognize this next one okay any further hints no
That's it. This is like it. You might like it. Okay
But yeah, so we got some new features on there as well coming out probably in the next day or two
Should be on the lookout for that. It's just like what you remember this some more so it's like a little bit upgraded
You know some more benefits to the subscribers of the shirt locker. Yep. Yep. It's true
All upside good stuff. Jockels stored dot com. You want to represent that's where you get the stuff cool
Speaking of subscriptions you can subscribe to this podcast on iTunes Google Play Stitcher leave some reviews
Also, we have Jockel unraveling don't I've been kicking out a couple of those recently we're hitting some topics some topics that are a little bit
Let's say controversial maybe they're heavy for sure. Definitely heavy
The Christmas joy one just came out about the about total award world award too. What that was all about
So if you want a little Christmas joy check out the Jockel unraveling sarcastic not a place for not not a place for joy
But if you want to know about history so we don't repeat it
We want to find out what's going on in the world and how we're late so what happened the past check out jocco unraveling podcast with Darryl Cooper grounded podcast warrior kid podcast
We also have jockel underground
Jockel underground dot com it's our own
Free sanctuary free from tyranny
So look we don't control the platforms that are out there
We hope we don't ever have to
Upend them we hope we don't get
Forced off of them, but we don't know what's gonna happen so we have to have a contingency that contingency is
Jockel underground dot com if you want to support our
our our sanctuary
Then you can
Go to jockel underground with our dot com $8.18 a month to help support us when we're doing there we get you a
additional podcast that's Q and A going over some tangential but important topics
So yeah, and if you can't afford it that's all right
We still want you in the game email assistance at jocconerground dot com
Here's a youtube channel. Yeah official
A lot of good stuff on there. Is that like a blue check mark? I think it's gray. Oh, you know, but yes
I check my well, you know, we know it's not yet we know it's not an imposter scenario
Okay, I'm seeing but yeah the video version of this podcast you can see what everybody looks like it's a good good mode
A lot of people watching
YouTube on their TVs nowadays. Well with smart TVs and whatnot, you know what that is right a smart TV
Yeah, you can watch YouTube on it
That's for the ways. Yeah, sir. You are but yeah, man. So yeah, YouTube channel. We got some extraips on there
You know some other stuff some additional stuff. We do we're starting to put some additional stuff on there
So yeah check that one out subscribe if you want also I made it I made an album
Well echo recorded it. I guess I talked anyways if you have maybe moments a week
If you want to come them check out psychological warfare
It's available where you view by MP3s. We also have flipside cameras.com to code out Myers
Making cool stuff that you can hang on your wall here in America. So that's freaking legit
And then there's books obviously
The book that we covered today in the company of heroes by Mike Durant he also wrote the book the night stalkers
So those are great reads check those out final spin. I wrote them
A fiction story
It's available right now check it out final spin leadership strategy tactics field manual
The code devaluation that protocols discipline because freedom field manual
Wait, the warrior kid one two three and four get that freaking book for all the kids you know get all those books for all the kids you know for Christmas
That's my recommendation
I wish I could
Could get those books to every kid
So please help me because those books will help those kids also got Mike in the dragons
We have about face by current David Hackworth. I wrote the forward to the latest a dish
It's tree ownership and the dichotomy leadership which I wrote with my brother
Dave Babin we also have a leadership consultancy where leadership is the solution
Leadership is the solution and go to echelon front dot com if you want to check out what we're doing there
we have
Obviously consultancy we have live events we have the master we have field training exercises
We have EF battlefield we have the Dallas master coming up March 24th and 25th
We also have an online training
Academy
The extreme ownership academy
This is where you can come you can ask me questions and look it's about leadership pressure
But it's about taking ownership of your life
Take ownership of your life. Do you take do you are you able to control your life by
Reading one book or listening to one podcast are you able to learn jiu-jitsu by going one time to a class?
Are you able to get in good shape by going to the gym one time? No you need consistency
You need to review this stuff. That's why we made extreme ownership dot com
To help you take ownership of your life
So go and check that out and if you want to help service members active and retired their families
Gold star families you can check out Mark Lee's mom mom Ali
She's a incredible human being she has an incredible charity organization
And I just heard Joe Rogan talking about going into the hyperbaric chamber and how much he has benefited from it
one of the key things
That mama Lee's organization does is it gets
Sessions like
a month worth of sessions plus hotel plus living expenses while you're down there plus travel to get there to get veterans into these hyperbaric chambers
For a month worth of treatment or 45 days worth of treatment and there's been incredible feedback from everybody to the
Donut
So if you want to help with that, it's one of the many things that she does if you want to help or you want to donate or you want to get involved
Go to americasmideatwariers.org
And of course if you want more of my tedious talking or you need more of echoes questionable questions
You can find us on the in the webs
On Twitter on the gram and on Facebook echoes at equitrals and I am at jockelwillink and of course
Mike Durant
Running for the Senate in Alabama if you want to support him go to Mike Durant dot com
Look at his social media. You can see it's gonna be an interesting ride right? He's just getting in the game in social media at age 60
I should have told them
It's got a wild here's a YouTube channel too. Yep, so I was gonna just mention if he didn't know already
But hey, just let's be careful the only YouTube comments the careful as YouTube comments sure
On Twitter Mike Durant AL
Instagram Mike Durant AL Facebook Mike Durant AL and of course on YouTube Mike Durant for Senate
So once again, thanks to Mike Durant for coming on the podcast honored to have you here
Really incredible to meet someone in person
That I've known about and actually watched from a distance as he went through this incredibly traumatic
Situation, oh I watched along with the rest of the nation and really the rest of the world honored to have you on here
Thank you so much for coming and thank you for your continued service to this day and to other military personnel
There personnel out there in the world
Thank you for protecting our way of life at home and a special salute to the special operations aviation regiment the night stalkers
The night stalkers who fly into the worst places in the world for the best reasons
And also a solemn salute to the incredible special operations forces that served in Somalia and fought and died as heroes
And to our police and law enforcement firefighters paramedics and EMTs and dispatchers correction officers board of patrol
Secret service and all first responders. Thank you for protecting our way of life here at home
And everyone else out there
Well
No matter what happens
No matter what you're facing no matter how hard things to get
Remember
Remember the motto
Of the 160th special operations aviation regiment the saying
That got chief or officer Michael the ramp through the worst of times that that motto is simply
Night stalkers don't quit
And either should you no matter what do not quit
And until next time the Zeco and Jaco out